---
Title: Invest!—Memorizing Scripture
Date: 2014-01-19 23:05
Author: Chris Krycho
Category: theology
Tags: devotions
Passages: Colossians 1:1–12
Template: formats/devotions
...

Tonight, I am pausing from my normal discussion of the passages I've been
reading, to discuss instead how Jaimie and I have begun memorizing Scripture
together this spring.[^memorization-confession] Both of us have been persuaded
of the value of memorizing Scripture for a long time (since before we met, and
indeed since before we were in college).[^value] Jaimie's private Christian
school included Scripture memorization as part of its curriculum, and the church
at which I grew up likewise emphasized it as a useful discipline. Accordingly,
both of us learned at relatively  young ages to practice memorizing verses from
the Bible. We may not have been AWANA champions, but both of us have a good bit
of the Bible stored in our memories.

During college, as I studied the Bible and studied hermeneutics, I became
increasingly convinced that the approach I had been taking to memorizing
Scripture was, if not exactly *unhelpful* (learning the Bible is a good move,
full stop), nonetheless not nearly as helpful as it could be. Specifically, my
emphasis on memorizing a verse here and a verse there---even when I went so far
as to memorize the whole sentence---seemed to me to prevent me from really
remembering the full meaning of the passage in question. Several times, I
discovered that a verse I had memorized meant something other than what I had
thought, as I studied its context carefully. It did not take but a few of these
incidents for me to decide that I wanted to try something different.
Accordingly, I decided to stoip memorizing individual verses or short passages,
and to try instead to memorize a book of the Bible. That way, every single verse
would automatically be in context for me.

You are probably thinking I was crazy, and/or (for those of you who know me
well) that it is a typically over-the-top Chris Krycho thing to do. In some ways
that might be true, at least in the details of my implementation: I jumped in
with Hebrews, since it is one of my favorite books in the Bible. Things were
actually going fairly well with that project; I had succesfully memorized up
through chapter 7 and was working on verse 8... and then I graduated from
college. Suddenly, the 15--20 minutes each day in which I had been accustomed to
walking around on campus---the time in which I had been practicing my Scripture
memory---was gone. I fell out of the habit, and never finished memorizing the
book.

Fast forward three and a half years. Jaimie and I moved to North Carolina, and
we started attending and soon joined [First Baptist Church of
Durham](http://www.fbcdurham.org/). During our membership class, we received an
interesting little booklet written by our senior pastor, Andy Davis, [_An
Approach to Extended Memorization of Scripture_][booklet]. Curious, I read
through it that evening. Pastor Davis outlined there both the benefits of
memorizing Scripture and---to my surprise and interest---basically the same
concerns I had had about memorizing individual passages out of context. But then
he did something profoundly helpful: he also provided a practical,
straightforward system to help people learn to memorize extended sections of
Scripture (i.e. *books*). And not just crazy, over-the-top, intense people like
Chris Krycho. Ordinary, not so strange people.

Last fall, Jaimie and I started trying to memorize Philippians together.
However, we did not have a system or a plan, and the attempt ended up going off
the rails. We were moving at different paces, we were not helping each other
review, and the whole thing eventually just sort of slid to a halt in the face
of our busy lives and our lack of a plan. As part of our start to the new year,
though, I suggested that we look at Pastor Davis' materials and see if they
would work for us. As it turns out, they do---they work really, really well.

Jaimie and I are 12 verses into Colossians 1, two weeks along. The system,
simple as it is, has been easy to keep up each day, and has helped us stay in
sync. We review together pretty much every day, and it has been a real joy.
Picking a shorter book helps a lot, too: it feels more doable. By the time our
next child is born in early June (Lord willing), we will have finished the book
and be reviewing it.

The basic system itself is simple:

  - Pick a book. (Start short. Dr. Davis recommends Ephesians, and I certainly
    wouldn't go longer than that.)
  - Day 1: read 1:1 ten times out loud, then repeat it ten times from memory.
  - Day 2: repeat 1:1 ten times from memory, checking the text if you need to.
    Once you finish that, read 1:2 ten times out loud, and then repeat it ten
    times from meory.
  - Days 3 and following: repeat all previously memorized verses once from
    memory. Then repeat the previous day's verse 10 times from memory. Then read
    the next verse ten times out loud, and then repeat it ten times from memory.

This way, one always reviews previous material in the book, but without it
taking overly long. For example, on day 6, one would review 1:1--5 from memory,
say 1:5 another 9 times out loud from memory, read 1:6 out loud ten times, and
then repeat 1:6 ten times from memory.

To be honest, this system works *far* better than the approach I had been taking
on my own, both when I was memorizing Hebrews years ago and when I was working
on Philippians last fall. The specific, active repetition helps solidify the
verses in my head, which is important, especially because there are some verses
that are just hard.

Pastor Davis outlines a good deal more in his [booklet][booklet], including
arguing for the value of memorizing Scripture, why tackling longer stretches is
helpful, and discussing both how to learn longer books and how to remember the
books one has already learned. I commend this approach to you, even as I urge
you strongly to consider making Scripture memory a regular spiritual discipline.

[^memorization-confession]: We actually tried starting this in the fall. It
    didn't work out so well. Keep reading.

[^value]: If you are not persuaded, I am not here going to make a full attempt
    to persuade you. Suffice it to say that I find it enormously helpful to have
    God's revelation stored up in my mind---I find that the Holy Spirit often
    uses it to convict me or encourage me throughout the day, and that it is
    incredibly valuable in interacting with others, whether building up fellow
    believers or speaking with those who do not believe.

[booklet]: http://www.fbcdurham.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Scripture-Memory-Booklet-for-Publication-Website-Layout.pdf