Title: A New Year of Devotions
Date: 2014-01-01 23:25
Author: Chris Krycho
Slug: new-year-devotions
Category: theology
Tags: devotions
Passages: 1 Kings 9â€“13, Psalm 1, Proverbs 1
Template: formats/devotions

I have found, over the years, that writing is a remarkably helpful tool for
thinking through the things I am learning. I have also found that I am often
better able to remain consistent in my study of Scripture if I am writing
regularly about it. That could be in a journal, or on a blog, or just about
anywhere. In 2014, I am going to experiment with posting this writing on my blog
---something I have done [before](http://2012-2013.chriskrycho.com/theology/topics/devotions/index.html)
to good effect for myself, and which a number of acquaintances seemed to like.
After talking it through with my wonderful wife, I have set myself a limit of
half an hour *total* devoted to writing these posts. Hopefully it will prove
profitable.

---

If it seems like 1 Kings 9--13 is a funny place to start this sort of thing,
that's because it is. But 1 Kings is where I am, and thus it is the place from
which I will continue---I do not see a good reason to start over at the
beginning *again* just a few months after having done so before.

A number of points stuck out at me as I worked through this passage. First, and
most important, is one of the recurring themes of the whole book: the question
of obedience to Yahweh,[^yahweh] and the consequences of rejecting him. From the
promise God offers Solomon  in chapter 9 through the death of a prophet in
chapter 13, the issue is clear. Obedience to God brings everlasting favor, and
disobedience brings death.

[^yahweh]: I know it is a bit unusual to spell out the name of God used in the
Old Testament like this, but it is my preference. I think it makes many passages
much clearer to read Yahweh instead of <span style="font-variant: small-
caps">Lord</span>, and it's simply what's there in the original (even if the
Jews historically have chosen not to say it---there's something interesting
here, but I shall pass over it today).

This is not exactly a new theme for the Bible as a whole: it shows up all the
way back in Genesis 3. Nor does it stop here (nor even under the New Covenant
with Christ): submission to God is characteristic of all who believe. Why? Not
because God is some cruel dictator, but because he is both omniscient and
omnibenevolent. He knows what is best for us. Defying his ways is like defying
gravity: it might make for a [catchy
tune](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FlMBcTGJ4YM&name=DefyingGravity), but the
net result is always crashing hard to the ground.

So: Yahweh promised Solomon great things if he would simply follow him alone and
not worship other gods. Solomon did exactly the opposite of what God had
commanded the kings of Israel, though: he married multiple foreign women who
themselves worshiped other gods,[^1] and ultimately he built altars to and
sacrificed to those other gods himself. We see the same thing in Jeroboam's
life: God made him promises of really marvelous import, if he would simply walk
with Yahweh. Instead, as soon as he became king he led the people *away* from
Yahweh, reasoning that Yahweh-worship was a threat to his own power, even though
it was a prophet of Yahweh who had first told him all that would happen and that
it was Yahweh who would do it. A righteous prophet ends up dead because he
disobeyed God's clear instructions.

In short: God means business, and we ought to pay attention when he commands us
in a certain area. Again, not because he is a tyrant, but because he loves us
and he is righteous. When we defy him, we are simultaneously wronging ourselves
and committing cosmic treason. It's a bad move, and he rightly responds in
judgment. That, in turn, though, takes me back to his *decisive* act of
judgment: the one the Godhead executed on itself, in the sacrificial, atoning
death of Christ on my behalf. My motivation for obedience, then, is not only
fear, but joyful gratitude.

It's a good start to the year.

[^1]: Note that the reason for the prohibition on marrying foreigners was always
religious, not ethnic. Solomon's own lineage (and thus, Jesus' too) includes
several foreign women---each of whom worshiped Yahweh.
