Title: Elijah and Elisha
Date: 2014-01-04 23:45
Author: Chris Krycho
Slug: elijah-elisha
Category: theology
Tags: devotions
Passages: 2 Kings 2â€“5, Psalm 4, Proverbs 4
Template: formats/devotions

One cannot help but notice, reading through 1 and 2 Kings, how much Elijah and
Elisha echo Moses and foreshadow the Messiah. They perform miracles that show up
the limitations of other so-called deities, part the Jordan, make clean what was
impure, give miraculous children, raise the dead, multiply food for a meal for
the hungry.[^bears] These men were prophets like Moses, but Israel knew that
they were not *the* prophet like Moses that the first savior of Israel had
promised.

[^bears]: To say nothing of cursing mockers to be attacked by bears, in one of
    the stranger passages in the old Testament.

Reading through these books, it is interesting that Israel was eagerly awaiting
another prophet like Elijah when Jesus came. Indeed, it is interesting that a
later prophet would speak of Elijah coming again. Reading through this material
---which was originally all a single book covering all of 1 Samuel through 2
Kings---one would not necessarily be inclined to call Elijah the greater of the
pair. Indeed, Elisha both asked for and apparently received a double portion of
the miraculous gift that Yahweh had given to Elijah. The text records far more
miracles performed by Elisha than by Elijah. (Indeed, most of that list above
belongs to Elisha and not to Elijah.)

Clearly, though, there was something special about Elijah.

I think it was his passion for the name of Yahweh, and I think the text makes
this abundantly clear. It is not that Elisha was *not* passionate for the glory
of Yahweh; it is that this is the main (and nearly the only) thing in view in
Elijah's ministry. Elijah's responsibility was to point the people to repentance
for their sins and to show up false religion for what it was. This he did. He
stood for the name of Yahweh under the threat of death and all alone. Other
faithful Yahweh-worshippers though there were in Israel at the time, it was
Elijah alone on the mountain confronting the four hundred priests of Baal, and
he alone who saw the mighty hand of Yahweh raised in triumph against Baalism.
He, like John the Baptizer, was the lone voice in the wilderness, calling the
people of Israel back to God.

Elisha's role was different: he was the man of miracles and the fierce judge. He
did the greatest miracles recorded in the Bible prior to the coming of the
Messiah; only in Jesus himself was there a greater provider, healer, or
resurrector. He pointed to the greatness of Yahweh through these miracles;
unlike Elijah, he did so in a time when many others worshipped Yahweh. He stood
on Elijah's shoulders, as it were.

I have often pondered over the last year or so that often it is the case that
younger leaders can seem (and perhaps are) more effective than their elders---
but that even when this is so, there is a foundation present *because* of the
elders that is too easily overlooked. Many young men's pastoral ministries are
successful not only because of their own faithfulness, but because of the work
of the pastors who preceded them. Many young men can be more doctrinally sound
than or more effective preachers than their predecessors *because* of their
predecessors. Elisha did his miracles in a land that had already seen Baalism
humbled under fire from Yahweh. I do my writing, ministry (such as it is), and
even thinking in the context set for me by faithful Christians who have gone
before, women and men who have diligently sought Christ and laid a foundation on
which I might build.