Title: Grappling With Genealogies	
Date: 2014-01-10 22:17
Author: Chris Krycho
Category: theology
Tags: devotions
Passages: 1 Chronicles 1â€“5, Psalm 10, Proverbs 10
Template: formats/devotions

<i class="editorial">A brief note ahead of the rest of the post: this month,
[ChristianAudio.com](http://christianaudio.com) is giving away the ESV "Hear the
Word" Audio Bible. Really, [for free][audio Bible]. You give them an email
address, you get the whole Bible, read *extremely* well. I highly recommend that
you follow up on this, because it is normally not inexpensive, though even so a
good audio Bible is a very good investment. Now, back to the regularly scheduled
post.</i>

---

As [challenging](/2014/temple-for-god/) as it can be to apply 2 Chronicles 1---5
correctly, finding the substance in a passage like 1 Chronicles 1---5 is even
harder, I think. The entire sequence is a list of names: fathers, sons,
occasional wives and daughters in the mix. Genealogies are one of the most
challenging sections in the Bible for Western readers, because they seem
enormously dry and pointless. (I saw a non-Christian comment on finding the
Bible incredibly boring the other day; I have no doubt that passaages like this
one contributed substantially to that assessment.) Truth be told, though I am
making a game effort at it, I still find these chapters difficult, too.[^sped-
up]

There are two things I hold onto as I consider these challenging chapters,
though. The first is Paul's affirmation that "All Scripture is breathed out by
God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training
in righteousness, that the man of God may be complete, equipped for every good
work" (2 Timothy 3:16---17, ESV). That "all" is important, because Paul included
1 Chronicles 1---5 and Numbers 1 and Zechariah 4, challenging though they are in
their different ways. He did not exclude them because they might not make as
much sense to a future generation in another part of the world. Indeed, I would
go so far as to say that under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, Paul
explicitly affirmed the value of these books in part *because* they would be
foreign to us.

Too often, we privilege our own cultural views as inherently correct in some
way. We assume that because genealogies do not matter *to us*, they do not
matter *at all*. Few of us, it is true, would be so bold as to say this out
loud, but deep down, that is what we really believe. (For what we really believe
to be true is what drives our actions.) The presence of these lengthy
genealogies in the very word of God stands as a clear rebuke to our cultural
snobbery--and to our chronological snobbery, too. These genealogies remind us
that we are not the first people in God's story, and that we will not be the
last. We are not the main characters in this narrative: even of those named in
these chapters, how many are familiar to us now?[^learned] How many men and
women, faithful followers of God, simply go unnamed in these passages? Likewise,
who will know our names a thousand years hence, should the Lord tarry?

This genealogy stands as a rebuke to our self-adulation and our emphasis on our
own value. It stands as a record of God's dealings with people who went long
before us, and thus as a testament to the historical character of God's salvific
work. It functions as a reminder that God's plan involves many a flawed hero,
and not a few villains. It points us back to the need for a king who would *not*
fit the pattern of all the kings named in this line. It highlights God's
faithfulness to keep his promises to Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and to David,
even in the face of Israel's and Judah's rebellious ways. It ultimately points
us to God himself, the one constant in all these names and relationships. He
oversaw their history, as he oversees ours. We ought to reflect more often on
those who have gone before us in the faith, and to thank God for them and for
his work in history. We ought to be ever more dedicated to worshiping the God in
whose hands history flows like a watercourse.

[^sped-up]: Confession time: I put the [audio][audio Bible] in 2&times; mode
while I was listening to the latter parts of this section. It helped.

[^learned]: Even having read through these chapters a number of times, it had
escaped me until tonight that David's generals, Joab, Asahel, and Abishai, were
his nephews--the sons of his sister Zeruiah (see 1 Chronicles 2:16). This detail
sheds interesting light on many of their interactions, especially on David's
reticence to remove them from authority even when they were unruly. Yet it had
previously been lost on me entirely.

[audio Bible]: http://christianaudio.com/free