Title: The Genesis Debate
Subtitle: A Plea for Sanity
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-08-18 22:00
Summary: With reference to history, witness, and textual issues, an argument for greater humility in the discussion of the meaning of Genesis 1, and particular for a willingness to be charitable to those with whom we disagree.
Slug: earth-age-inerrancy

<i class="editorial">A brief note on the title: I unabashedly stole it from D.A.
Carson's very helpful little book,
<a href="[] http://www.amazon.com/The-Inclusive-Language-Debate-Plea-Realism/dp/080105835X "><cite>The
Inclusive Language Debate: A Plea For Realism</cite></a>, which is a good read
and has a title I thought apropos. Now: on to the post's business!</i>

* * * * *

Clarifying Remarks
------------------

### The point of this post

I want you to walk away persuaded that there is room for a (much) wider degree
of disagreement on the age of the earth and the details of creation than many
evangelical and fundamentalist leaders sometimes assert---and indeed, that this
has been the case historically.

I am *not* particularly interested in persuading you that my particular view of
the age of the earth is correct, or indeed that you ought to change your views
at all. I just want you to walk away with an appreciation for the points to
consider on the topic, and hopefully encouraged about the open door for future
development of Christian thought on this complex and interesting issue.

### My take

Let me get a few things out of the way, right up front---I want you to know
where I am coming from:

1.  I believe the Bible is God's revelation of himself to us, and that when we
    read the Bible we are actually reading God's word. As such, I affirm the
    inerrancy of Scripture. I do *not* necessarily affirm anyone's favorite
    articulation of that important doctrine.[^1][^2]
2.  I am an old-earth creationist. I affirm that the universe is most likely
    somewhere in the neighborhood of 14 billion years old, that the earth formed
    about 5 billion years ago, and that there is an enormous well of geological
    history from which there actually are things Christians can learn.[^3]
3.  I do not in principle have an issue with God having used nearly any means to
    bring about the present biological state of the world we observe.
4.  I believe that Adam and Eve really did commit original sin, leading all of
    humanity into the bondage from which Jesus Christ delivered us in his
    incarnation, life, death, resurrection, and ascension.
5.  I do not see these position as inherently contradictory---though many of my
    friends, peers, and even pastors disagree.
6.  I think that Christians run two serious risks in this area: capitulating to
    the assertions of a world that we know to be hostile to the things of God,
    and rejecting real God-given knowledge and wisdom in ways that unnecessarily
    compromise our witness and cause us to miss out on things God wanted us to
    know about himself and his world. While the former of these risks is indeed
    more serious, ignoring the second risk puts us in hot water quite regularly
    as well.

Now, onto the meat of the post!

The Boundaries
--------------

This discussion is complicated by several major issues. First, readings of
Genesis 1--11 have been enormously varied over the history of the church.
Second, the narratives directly intersect with scientific data in ways that much
of the rest of the Scriptures do not. Closely related to this is a third point:
the complexity of the essential texts themselves.

### History

On this first bit: suffice it to say that the church's view of the days of
creation has been extremely *varied* over the last two thousand years. It is
common today to hear evangelical leaders (notably including but not limited to
Al Mohler and Ken Ham) suggesting that denial of six 24-hour days of creation is
tantamount to a denial of the inerrancy of Scripture. In the history of the
church, such a position is novel, to say the least. In addition to the oft-cited
Augustine quote on the matter, countless others have affirmed non-24-hour day
views.[^4] Importantly, this number includes such modern luminaries as B. B.
Warfield and J. Gresham Machen---no wobbly-kneed capitulators to modernism or
feeble falterers on inerrancy they, but both affirmed the "day-age" view of the
days of creation, *not* six 24-hour days.[^5]

To be sure, simply pointing to authorities' takes on the position does not tell
us what Scripture teaches (and indeed to do so is to commit the fallacy of
argument from authority!), but it *should* provide us with a degree of caution
in making pronouncements about the bounds of orthodox opinion. More, it ought to
give us pause when we start to identify our own interpretations with the bounds
of orthodoxy or even the bounds of inerrancy. It is perfectly reasonable to
suggest that those who have gone before us were mistaken (as indeed I think some
of them were). It is something else entirely to suggest that they were not only
mistaken but were all of them somehow rejecting the inerrancy or authority of
Scripture simply because their positions do not accord with our own. In
particular, when Warfield and Machen affirm an old earth, we would do well to
recognize that any interpretation of inerrancy which excludes dogmatically an
old earth is inherently problematic.

Note well: I am not making here any comment at all on what the age of the earth
is, nor even on whether we should or should not affirm an old earth view is
within the bounds allowed by Scripture. I am simply calling for a dose of
humility in the face of the reality of centuries of witness that differ from the
line taken by many evangelicals and fundamentalists today.

### Scripture and Science

There are only a few areas in which the things the Bible says intersect directly
with the findings of natural science. This is one of them. To be sure, there are
many ways in which God's revelation informs (or at least, should inform!)
Christians' view of the world around us and the value of scientific
undertakings. Moreover, our affirmation of a supernatural character to the world
means we will reject certain ideologies---hard naturalism is simply an untenable
stance for us. That being said, though, the early chapters of Genesis are one of
the only places in Scripture where the natural sciences and the Bible speak
directly to the same issues.

In Genesis, we have an account of the creation of the world and the origin of
humankind. The natural sciences[^6] also give us an account of the creation of
the world and the origin of humankind. Whether the two do or can be made to
agree is one of the major points of contention not only among Christians but
also between many secularists and believers: simply witness the barbed critiques
of Christianity at the hands of the New Atheists over the last decade, many of
them aimed directly at this point.

In most conflict-ridden areas of our lives and public witness, Christians stand
opposed to the *moral* positions of the world around us. In this area, we stand
at least potentially in opposition to an quite different aspect of the world:
the pursuit of natural knowledge. True: all orthodox Christians grant that the
human mind is in some ways "fallen" and therefore unable to properly apprehend
all truth. At the same time, we *also* affirm that even the fallen mind is the
mind of a being made *imago dei* and situated in a world made rationally by a
wise God. We believe that we see in the "book of nature" the handiwork of our
creator, and in our own minds the apex of that creation. We affirm that there is
a great body of knowledge available to all human beings, that our minds still
allow us to understand the world around us *rightly* even if incompletely.

More than that, we believe that it is precisely because of God's handiwork on
display that all humans stand accountable before him; Paul reminds us that we
are all without excuse because creation itself points to the existence of God.

We therefore ought to hesitate before suggesting that the many scientists who
have read th book of nature to suggest an old earth are simply victims of the
fall. It is one thing to suggest that the evidence can be misread: of course
this is so. It is something else to suggest that nearly all astronomers and
geologists, Christian and non-Christian alike, are simply deluded. This is an
incredibly strong claim, and the evidence is on those who would advance it to
back it up---not simply to assert it.

The reality is that we face an area of tension here. The most straightforward
reading of Genesis 1--11 is that of a young Earth which was covered in a
worldwide flood. The most straightforward reading of the natural record is of an
ancient Earth scarred by many catastrophes (but not, as near as we can tell, a
global flood). These two readings stand in tension with each other. It is
easiest to collapse the tension one way or the other: to dismiss modern science
as a dangerous delusion, or to dismiss the early chapters of Genesis as mere
mythology. I think *both* of these are missteps, and both fail to do justice to
the seriousness which the topic deserves.

#### Public Witness

One corollary of this is that our stance on the relationship between science and
Scripture impinges on our public witness in unique ways. When as believers we
suggest that all of modern science's readings of the book of nature are
delusional, we are doing more than critiquing the findings of that science. We
are speaking of those who *conduct* the science. The timbre of much discussion
of non-young-earth views among evangelicals and fundamentalists is one of
implicit or explicit suspicion that "those secularists" are waging a war against
the truth. I heartily affirm that there really are spiritual forces at work
opposing the truth of God---both internal and external to human nature itself.
That being said, perhaps we ought to be careful when asserting that the *only*
reason someone might disagree with our reading of Genesis 1--11 is Satanic
delusion.

We unnecessarily hinder our witness when we make disagreement on this point a
matter of conspiracy or willful opposition to the truth. Whether the young-earth
creationist is right or wrong, the assumption that those who disagree with him
are conspirators or blinded by lies is astoundingly arrogant. It leaves no room
whatsoever for the notion that one *might actually be wrong*. It is far more
profitable to grapple with the tensions in our positions, whatever those
positions may be.[^7] Failing to do unnecessarily leaves us without any
credibility at all.

Let me be clear: I am willing to be taken as non-credible by the world around
me. Wherever Scripture demands that we stand against the world, I will do so. My
question is simply this: Does Scripture demand that here? Or is it simply *my
interpretation* that demands it? If the latter, it behooves me to offer others a
more charitable interpretation.[^8] Perhaps they are not hostile conspirators or
pitiably deluded fools after all.

As a friend of mine (who characterizes himself as 'an empirical agnostic
atheist') put it some months ago:

> I would have a lot more respect for that group [Ken Ham and Anwers in Genesis]
> if they could just say "we believe that Earth is only a few thousand years
> old, and we recognize that our current scientific understanding strongly
> indicates otherwise, but at this time we just can't reconcile the discrepancy"
> instead of "secularist have hijacked science to mislead you into thinking
> Earth is older than it actually is".[^9]

He is right: it takes a great deal more humility to say, "Look, I recognize the
trouble with my position, and I hold it nonetheless" than to say, "There is no
trouble with my position!" in the face of all evidence to the contrary. We can
facilely pretend that any opposition we receive is simply the result of our
faithfulness to the truth---or we can recognize that sometimes, we *earn*
hostility from the world because of our own lack of charity and
superciliousness.

(For the record, that has been me, too many times to count. I am not pointing my
finger at young-earth creationists here; I am pointing it right at the man in
the mirror. I have alienated my fair share and then some of non-Christians by my
intransigence and my accusatory attitude. God forgive me.)

The old earth creationist has to face up to the fact that his reading of the
Bible is less natural than the young earth creationist's. The young earth
creationist has to face up to the fact that her reading of the world is less
natural than that of the old earth creationist's. Can we not simply be so honest
as to admit as much? All of our positions have weaknesses. One of them is right
(or at least, *more* right), and we can hold them confidently and even
boldly---but we do not need to assume that those with whom we differ are either
the victims or the perpetrators of some conspiracy to hide the real truth.[^10]

### Textual Issues

The crux of this issue in many ways is what exactly the text says in Genesis. On
this, I want again to suggest not that you embrace my particular interpretation
but that you recognize the need for humility in dealing with the particular
passages in question.

It is common among young-earth creationists to assert that the days of Genesis 1
are *obviously* meant to be taken as literal 24-hour days. Those holding this
view point to the use of the Hebrew word *yom* translated "day" here. The word
most commonly refers to 24-hour days, and all but one other time when put in
context with the words for "evening" and "morning" which punctuate the text in
Genesis ("and there was evening, and there was morning, the first day...")
certainly refer to such a span.

However, there are a number of reasons why we should be cautious in making such
an assertion with any degree of dogmatism. First, the very first time *yom*
appears after this is Genesis 2:4, where it very certainly does *not* refer to a
24-hour period. Second, the days certainly were not all *solar* days if we take
the passage at face value. (This is not to say they were not 24 hours long, only
that the first three were apparently not solar days per the straightforward
reading of the text.)

Third, and most important, is the question of genre. There is a clear and
distinct shift in language between the elevated prose of Genesis 1 and the more
normal historical narrative language of Genesis 2 and following.[^11] The first
chapter is not poetry, but it makes heavy use of standard Hebrew poetic devices,
especially repetition, in ways that set it off from what follows. The clear
shift between the two should caution us

Conclusion
----------

There is a *lot* of room for disagreement on the specifics of this issue. While
there are some lines we should not cross, those lines are much broader than some
evangelical and fundamentalist leaders often suggest. One can be a thoroughgoing
evangelical with a deep commitment to the inerrancy of Scripture and believe the
earth old and even---dare I say it---that God used gradual means to bring about
the biological diversity of the planet.[^12] Whether affirming the [Framework
Hypothesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Framework_interpretation_(Genesis)), a
[functional account of
origins](http://biologos.org/resources/multimedia/john-walton-on-understanding-genesis "John Walton on Understanding Genesis")
interpretation, a [preparation of the
land](http://www.desiringgod.org/articles/science-the-bible-and-the-promised-land)
view, a [day-age](http://www.reasons.org/explore/topic/age-of-the-earth) view,
or with the Fathers yet other readings, there are *many* legitimate ways of
reading Genesis 1 apart from literal 24-hour days, and all of them within the
bounds not only of orthodoxy but also of the affirmation of inerrancy.[^13]

[^1]: I also do not think that one must affirm inerrancy to be a healthy
    Christian---though I *do* think it is quite helpful and important, I do
    *not* think it is essential for salvation or indeed for a great deal of
    sanctification.

[^2]: In particular, I have not spent enough time thinking carefully about the
    ramifications of e.g. the Chicago Statement on Inerrancy to know whether I
    can affirm it meticulously.

[^3]: For those of you "in the know" I basically take John Sailhamer's
    "preparation of the land" view of Genesis 1.

[^4]: If you want a detailed exploration of the history of the church's
    intepretation of the creation account in particular for its first millennium
    and a half, see Robert Letham, "'In the Space of Six Days': The Days of
    Creation from Origen to the Westminster Assembly," WTS 61:2 (1999) 149--174.

[^5]: Warfield helped formulate our modern explications of the doctrine, and
    Machen was one of its firmest defenders in the modernist controversy that
    embroiled the American denominations early in the 20th century; he quite
    literally stands at the head of the fundamentalist tradition that spanned
    the 20th century.

[^6]: And particularly, what used to be called "natural history," as my friend
    [Vernon King](http://www.vernonking.org) pointed out in a recent
    conversation.

[^7]: For my part, I have to deal with the fact that the most straightforward
    reading is *not* the old-earth reading of the text, and *especially* with
    the difficulty of reading something besides an actually global flood in the
    Flood narrative. I fully grant that this is the weakness of my position.

[^8]: More on this below in the [Textual Issues](#textual-issues) section below.

[^9]: Private correspondence with Jerrad Genson, February 12, 2014.

[^10]: And yes: here I *am* calling out Ken Ham a bit. Every time he and his
    fellow travelers assert that the evidence *obviously* points to a young
    earth and a global flood, they are being remarkably uncharitable to anyone
    who disagrees with them---and remarkably arrogant.

[^11]: Note: this still very much leaves the old-earth creationist with problems
    with the Flood and Noah's Ark, which are part of the latter, historical
    section. It is difficult, if not impossible, to draw a strong line between
    the literary character of Genesis 2--11 and that of Genesis 12ff.

[^12]: A final aside, with *every* intent to be provocative: consider that given
    the physical limitations of the ark Noah built, God *certainly* had to
    engage in a massive program of theistic evolution to repopulate the earth
    after a global flood. See
    [here](https://answersingenesis.org/natural-selection/speciation/) for an
    example of the sort of evasion of the issue that goes on at Answers in
    Genesis dealing with precisely this issue. This is the worst sort of
    hair-splitting. Again: we should have the intellectual integrity to admit
    the weaknesses of our positions.

[^13]: On Michael Gungor, who sparked this whole discussion this time around---
    To be clear, I think Michael Gungor is mistaken about Genesis 1--11. I think
    a mythologizing reading of those chapters is textually misguided and
    spiritually unhelpful. But I also think that he might have landed in a
    position more like the one I embrace---a position that affirms both the
    inerrancy of Scripture *and* an old earth---if such an option had been
    presented to him coherently, rather than ruled out by young earth
    creationists as just as heretical and dangerous as the mythological view. I
    do *not* think Michael Gungor is a heretic; I simply think he is wrong on
    this in ways that may set his feet on an unhelpful trajectory---and I hope
    that he might have conversations with folks who can help him come to
    reconcile the inerrancy of Scripture with an old earth.

