Title: Startlement
Subtitle: The most astounding truth: God became a man.
Date: 2014-12-29 20:00
Author: Chris Krycho
Summary: The Incarnation is the most surprising of all the miracles. All miracles are a surprise, but this one startles more than any other.

<i class="editorial">This was originally published as part of James Metelak's
2015 [25 Days of Christmas Project](http://headpiecestraw.blogspot.com/).</i>

---

"Startling": this is the best word I can find for the doctrine of the
Incarnation. It is the most surprising of all the miracles. Every miracle is a
surprise, of course; it would not be a miracle otherwise. Still, there is
something uniquely and specially striking about this one.

God became a man.

C. S. Lewis called this the central miracle of the Christian faith, the miracle
on which all others depend: if this one happened, then of course all the others
are possible. What is feeding a few thousand people with five loaves and two
fish compared to the transcendent One becoming immanent? What is healing a
centurion's dead servant, set next to the Creator squealing at his mother's
breast? What is walking on water or calming a storm, for the God who took up the
image of the image of God? Not to make little of these miracles---they are in no
way trivial or light. But the Incarnation stands apart.

Even the resurrection of the Son of God is less surprising than his birth. Now,
we must never minimize Jesus' resurrection. It is the means of our justification
and the basis all our hope. It is the rock beneath our joy in the long and
painful days that stand between us and our own restoration. Its enormity
remains. Still, it seems to me less astonishing than the Incarnation. Death has
always been an interloper; its reign was always temporary. Once God had taken up
this frail form, it seems almost unthinkable that he would *fail* to raise it
from the dead. But the Creator-God wrapping himself in creature-hood was never
something we could have guessed.

Look closer. The wonders---the strange, delightful paradoxes---mount up.

God does not change. The Father and the Son and the Spirit are as ever they have
been: perfectly united, delighting in each other, needless and complete. And
yet, in that marvelous moment in Mary's womb, there was a permanent change. The
Son was then, is now, and will forever be, a human being. He never ceased to be
eternal God---not for a moment---but now he is also everlasting man. It was the
first and only beginning in the being of God.

God is spirit; he dwells in unapproachable light; no eye can see him and no hand
touch him. Jesus the Messiah, though, is a human being through and through. He
is David's descendant, and Judah's, and Abraham's, and Noah's, and Adam's. He is
not invisible at all. Nor is he merely a hologram, an image without the
substance of the thing. Other hands touched him, in hope and in hate. His own
hands grew blisters when he first learned to use a hammer at his father's side,
touched in healing and forgiveness, were pierced with real nails, still had
holes Thomas could when he was raised. His feet had calluses from walking the
dusty roads between Jerusalem and Judea.

The Triune Godhead is not taught and does increase in understanding. All
knowledge is his from forever to forever. Yet Jesus learned. He grew in wisdom
and stature and favor with God and man; he learned obedience through what he
suffered and so became perfect. The immortal, invisible, only wise God took up a
mortal body that died, displayed prominently for all to see, in the supreme act
of foolishness as the world judges such things. When it was finished, he did not
cast away the body as so much detritus. He kept it and raised it gloriously new,
beautiful and undying.

God needs nothing. He is totally, completely self-sufficient. Everything that
has ever existed or ever will exist, he created, and without his sustaining
power everything would immediately cease to exist. He does not sleep, and never
needs to eat. The Father worked through the Son to create all things, and it is
in the Son that all things hold together. Yet when he walked this earth he ate
and slept and had to put away his body's waste. It was not the appearance but
the reality of need. He was both a little boy getting thirsty as he ran around
the hot streets of Egypt, and the one who ensures the water that would refresh
him continued to exist.

God is holy. He is unassailably good, perfectly just, unfailingly
righteous---and Jesus' family history is a series of portraits of human sin: an
adulterous murderer, a Canaanite woman of ill repute, a man who slept with his
daughter-in-law, and more than a few who worshipped carved-up rocks and trees
instead of God. We were made in the image of God, the mirror of divinity, but
the humanity the Son took up was shattered and dirtied beyond recognition. Theh
body the Son took was not one crafted not to share our weaknesses; it was like
ours in every way. *This* flesh he baptized, and this flesh divinized. We have
come to share truly in the nature of God because God came and shared truly all
the nature of man.

The Creator joined with his own being a created, broken thing. Of course every
sad thing must now begin to come untrue. If that restoration comes slower than
we might hope, we can sense its inevitability nonetheless, like slow-growing
vines spreading cracks in some great edifice. The walls will fall---maybe not
today, and maybe not tomorrow, but they will fall. Human being, has been joined
once more to divinity, as it was meant to be from the beginning. Someday we will
be right again---maybe not today, and maybe not tomorrow, but we will be right
again.

Every miracle is a surprise, but the Incarnation of the Son of God astounds us
at every turn, until it makes every other surprise seem all-but-inevitable. When
unchanging God has undergone a permanent change, invisible God has become
forever visible, unneeding God has experienced need, unlearning God has learned,
immortal God has come to die in a mortal body---what does "impossible" even
mean?

The Word became flesh and dwelt among us. Old things are gone. All things are
new. Glory to God in the highest.