Title: Halfway to His Own Thesis
Subtitle: A Review of <cite>Five Smooth Stones for Pastoral Work</cite>
Date: 2014-04-12 08:00
Author: Chris Krycho
Template: formats/class
Class: Old Testament Introduction II
Professor: Dr. Heath Thomas
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Category: Theology
Tags: M. Div., SEBTS, book reviews

_Five Smooth Stones for Pastoral Work_, by Eugene H. Peterson. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 1980. 241 pp. $20.

## Overview

In _Five Smooth Stones for Pastoral Work_, Eugene Peterson advocates for a
biblically grounded rather than psychologically-driven approach to pastoral
work. He argues that the idea that pastors must first of all be up to date and
current has things precisely backwards: the pastor's responsibility is to lead
his congregation back to timeless realities, not into the hippest fads of the
day. He suggests that the *Megilloth*, the "five scrolls" of Songs of Songs,
Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Esther, have particular lessons to teach
pastors as they seek to bring "what is essential in the human condition, not
what is accicental" (p. 2) down into the "idiosyncrasies of the local and the
personal" (p. 5). A failure either to hold fast to the eternal word and will of
God, or to bring it home to those to whom the pastor ministers, will leave the
people without what they most deeply need: a shepherd through the vagaries and
trials of life.

Peterson provides a substantial introduction to the book (some ten percent or so
of the book's text), in which he traces out his thesis in detail. He then
divides the rest of the book into five discussions of pastoral work, grounding
each in one of those "five scrolls." In each, Peterson interacts with the
psychologizing tendency of the present day, the history of the interpretation of
the Biblical book in question, and how pastors might learn from and apply the
lessons of the book to their own work in their own congregations. For Peterson,
Song of Songs is a model for directing God's people into richer prayer, Ruth is
a picture of situating individual stories in the context of salvific history,
Lamentations is a guide to walking with people through their suffering,
Ecclesiastes is a help in rejecting false religion in place of the fear of God,
and Esther is a pointer to the essentially communal nature of the people of God.

## Analysis

Curiously, the most significant problem with the book might at first appear to
be one of its great strengths. Peteron's skill as a writer is such that he can
sometimes carry the reader along by sheer rhetorical effect---but this is in
some sense a result antithetical to the purpose of the text. In a text
explicitly and self-consciously aiming to point pastors away from technique and
the tendency to mistake emotion for changed lives, the contrast with what
Peterson actually does in large swaths of the book is striking and unfortunate.
There are too many places where Peterson relies on the emotional impact of his
words rather than on the text itself. Nearly the whole chapter on Esther falls
into this trap, as do large swaths of the chapters on Ecclesiastes.

It is not so much that the points Peterson makes in these chapters are wrong:
many of them are quite on target. It is that, disconnected from the text from
which he purports to draw them, they become mere floating assertions about the
world---assertions that, however beautifully made, we may take or leave as they
strike us. There is too much technique in Peterson's theologizing and too little
of the Scripture to which he enjoins his readers to return.

Granted that Peterson makes no claim to be writing exegetical commentaries on
the text, but he opens the book with the reminder that "we don't, and we must
not, lay our own foundations" (p. 11). Indeed, he (quite rightly) spends the
whole introduction pleading for pastors to ground their work not in the trends
of the day but in the "eternal will and word of God" (p. 5). It is a strange
thing that he should then spend so much of the book on his own ruminations and
not wrestling with the particulars of those texts. This is a significant loss,
because when Peterson does remain more closely engaged with the text, as in his
chapters on Ruth and Lamentations, and as in some parts of his treatment of
Ecclesiastes, the effect is marvelous. The reader is drawn into wonder at the
way God's word guides us effectively for pastoral ministry. The pastor is
reminded that the circumstances and trials he and his flock face are not things
newly sprung up in the late twentieth or early twenty-first century, but the
sorts of things for which God has already supplied guides and instruction in the
Scriptures.

But this is no surprise: this is Peterson's own thesis. The power of our faith,
the fruitfulness of pastoral ministry (and the effectiveness of our books
thereon) is not in our technique but in grappling deeply with the word of God in
our own situations. The more he grapples with the Scriptures, the more his
technique serves the text, the better Peterson's book is---and vice versa. Where
technique serves exposition, the reader is built up. Where exposition falls
aside and rhetoric reigns, the reader may be moved emotionally, but little
remains when that glow fades.

Thus, for four of the five chapters in the book, Peterson's success in advancing
his thesis may largely be measured by the extent to which he engages the text.
In Ruth and Lamentations, the narrative and poetry respectively drive the
discussion, and so the chapters are profoundly helpful. The discussion of Ruth
helps the pastor see his peoples' personal stories rightly---and thus, to help
his people see their own stories rightly. They are not the end-all and be-all
that modern psychology might make them out to be, but neither are they
insignificant. Indeed, they are all the more significant precisely *because*
they are part of something much bigger than themselves. The discussion of
Lamentations helps a pastor to see the necessity both of walking *through*
suffering and sorrow with his flock and of helping them come to resolution in
the right time. Petersons' treatment of Ecclesiastes, as a guide to saying *no*
to false religion, seems to be an accurate analysis of the book, but Peterson
veers away from the Text. He deals too little with the specific ways in which
*Qoheleth* confronts our culture and too much in the sweeping generalizations
about the value of those confrontations. Least helpful of all is his treatment
of Esther, in which he rightly diagnoses severe problems in the culture around
us but leaves aside almost everything in the book itself. We desperately need
the kind of rebuke to individualism he suggests here. Whether Esther can support
that kind of rebuke, still less offer an alternative vision of the people of
God, is left aside in favor of a good but largely-unrelated discussion of Saul
and Amalek and the shape of ministry.

Peterson's treatment of the Song of Songs deserves its own analysis. The text is
notoriously hard to interpret, and has been subject to countless different
readings. Peterson falls squarely into the allegorical camp, though he gives the
allegorical reading something of a twist. The urgency of romantic (both
emotional and sexual) desire so prominent in the book he transmutes into a
picture of the Christian's right desire for communion with God. This was the
chapter in which Peterson hewed *most* closely to the text, and so it was the
chapter least susceptible to the problems outlined above. As with all treatments
of the Song, though, the effectiveness of the chapter hinges on whether one
finds Peterson's interpretation accurate. (I did not.) Insofar as one grants
Peterson's interpretation, though, the chapter is an effective argument for the
necessity of prayer, and especially of the pastor leading his people to pray
with greater fervency.

## Conclusion

_Five Smooth Stones for Pastoral Work_ is in some ways a very good book, but in
others it falls short---an especially unfortunate reality given the very real
problems at which it aimed. That Peterson wants to see pastors grounding their
*pastoring* in the Scriptures as well as their preaching and teaching is clear.
Less clear is whether this book will be as effective as it could have been in
accomplishing that end. Good pastoral work does not run aground only on the
rocks of psychology. Rhetoric is an equally deadly reef, and it may be the more
tempting to a skilled writer passionate for the recovery of Biblical pastoral
work.

The chapters on Ruth and Lamentations were excellent and profoundly helpful
treatments of the topics they addressed, and Peterson's treatment of Song of
Songs was at least interesting. Because he exchanged exposition for effect in
his treatments of Ecclesiastes and Esther, though, the book falters. Though his
words never failed to pack an emotional punch, they were too often hollowed out
by their lack of a connection to the text. In this, these chapters serve as an
accidental and unfortunate illustration of the necessity of Peterson's own
thesis. We need not more effective psychology, nor more powerful lnaguage, but a
deeper reliance on and connection to the word of God.

