---
Title: Be Holy!
Subtitle: A Review of <cite>An Infinite Journey</cite>
Date: 2014-12-10 12:00
Author: Chris Krycho
Template: formats/class
Class: Pastoral Ministry Internship
Professor: Dr. Andrew M. Davis and Andy Winn
School: FBC Durham for Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Category: Theology
Tags: M. Div., SEBTS, FBC Durham, papers, book reviews
...

<i class="editorial">I would like to preface the following review by noting that
Andy Davis is not just any author, and indeed not just any pastor. He is one of
*my* pastors. This makes the task of writing a critical book review somewhat
strange. On the one hand, I wanted to write this review as I would any such. On
the other hand, I wanted to take care to show respect to a man whom God has used
to shepherd me and my family for the past two years since we moved to North
Carolina, and whom I regard very highly for his faithfulness in serving the
church gathered as First Baptist Church of Durham. I hope I have struck the
balance appropriately. And as I hope will become clear, though there were a few
places where this book could be stronger, it is nonetheless extraordinarily
valuable. I have been challenged and indeed have grown in holiness because of
having read it. I commend it to you.</i>

---

_An Infinite Journey: Growing toward Christlikeness_, by Andrew M. Davis,
Greenville: Ambassador International, 2014, 480 pages.

## Overview
Andrew Davis' _An Infinite Journey_ is a careful, thorough, heavy exploration of
the doctrine and practice of sanctification in the Christian life. Davis, the
long-time pastor of First Baptist Church in Durham, North Carolina and an
adjunct professor at nearby Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary, has
clearly dedicated considerable time and consideration to the topic of holiness
and growth in the Christian life, and this consideration is on display
throughout what is ultimately a very helpful book.

Davis begins by introducing the concepts which permeate the rest of the book:
the saving work of God in Christ and the Christian's lasting dependence on the
Holy Spirit. Perhaps surprisingly (at least to the casual reader), he opens not
with the topic of sanctification, but with justification, arguing that all real
Christian growth must be predicated on a right understanding of the gospel.
Thus, he spends some time tracing out the story of salvation, culminating in
Christ's atoning death on the cross and resurrection, and his institution of the
church and sending the Holy Spirit to save and then shape the internal lives of
Christians throughout the ages. He further argues that all Christians are
involved in two "infinite journeys"---the external journey of evangelism and
discipleship, and the internal journey of growth in holiness. Both, he notes,
are essential for the health of the Christian: to be deficient in either is to
demonstrate either ignorance or hard-heartedness toward the things of God.

After this introduction, Davis turns to a map of the second of these journeys:
the internal path of growing Christ-likeness. His thesis is that sanctification
is a four-part process, involving a continuous sequence of knowledge, faith,
character, and action, each feeding into the next. Knowledge of God produces
faith; increasing faith produces Christlike character; a more Christlike
character results in more Godward actions; and those Godward actions in turn
lead to a greater knowledge of God himself. Davis dedicates a section of the
book to each of these ideas, examining in detail Scriptural support for the
concept and then examples of the element in the lives of figures in Scripture,
especially Christ. Finally, he turns to a section dedicated to application,
looking at the knowledge-faith-character-action cycle as a whole in both
Scripture and a variety of day-to-day scenarios.

## Analysis
Davis' treatment of the doctrines of sanctification is thorough and compelling,
most of all because it is drenched in Scripture. Early in the book, Davis
explicitly spells out his commitment to the centrality, sufficiency, and
authority of Scripture, and the text of the book backs this up. It is common to
hear authors affirm the importance of Scripture; it is rare to see it so born
out so clearly in their writing. Even apart from the explicit references on
nearly every page, the text bears the unmistakable imprint of Davis' own
practice of memorizing books of the Bible. Allusions, near quotes, and implicit
references to Scripture appear multiple times on nearly every page.

This Scriptural emphasis leads to the book's other great strengths. First, Davis
makes no point without basing the assertion on Scripture, and he draws on every
section of the Bible to demonstrate the importance of each aspect of his map for
growth in holiness. Moreover, he follows Scripture's lead in grounding
sanctification in the work of Christ mediated to us by the Holy Spirit. Davis'
emphasis on the work of the Spirit is especially helpful. Though he is by no
means a charismatic in the modern sense of the word, it is clear that he is
gripped by the reality that sanctification simply does not happen without the
work of the Holy Spirit. This is an essential corrective for two kinds of
churches: those tempted to ignore the Spirit, and those tempted to ignore all
the works of the Spirit apart from those that result in visible signs. Rightly,
Davis' doctrine of sanctification is trinitarian: holy people whole-heartedly
worship the Father in Spirit-empowered dependence on the finished work of the
Son.

Second, this Scriptural care allows Davis to navigate the difficult topic of
Spirit-dependent human effort that characterizes Biblical sanctification.
Because sanctification is the one aspect of salvation in which people are called
to work (e.g. in Phil. 2:12), many believers are tempted to treat sanctification
as a wholly human endeavor. Davis repudiates this notion, showing again and
again that sanctification---like the justification that precedes it and the
glorification that will follow it---is ultimately a work of God and one that
brings him all glory. No person will be able to claim the credit for their own
sanctification before God at the day of judgment. At the same time, he also
rejects a Keswickian spirituality ("let go and let God"), even when dressed up
as mere gospel dependence. However much in vogue the notion may be that we can
do nothing and God does everything for us, it is simply not true. God requires
us actively to seek him and his holiness. Davis rightly recognizes both these
dangers and charts a course between them. The pursuit of holiness is empowered
by the Holy Spirit, and believers must always fix their eyes on the finished
work of Christ and the promise of future glory. Yet believers keep their eyes on
Christ and rely on the Spirit *to work*---not to sit still and trust God to
float them toward holiness.

The book does have a few weaknesses. First, although the book's length and
thoroughness are valuable in many ways, they also make this a difficult sell for
anyone who is not already a dedicated reader. Moreover, while much of the length
was inevitable in a work this thorough on a topic this complex, the book could
be substantially shorter were it edited more carefully. Trimming the lengthy
introduction and removing some repetition, unnecessary explanations, and
clarifications would make the work stronger as well as shorter and more
approachable. Given Davis' goals---to stir up believers to pursuing
holiness---this would be profoundly helpful, as it would allow for the book to
be used in a broader variety of contexts.

Second, a number of Davis' references to words' meanings in Greek are either
extraneous or inaccurate. In particular, he regularly committed the so-called
etymological fallacy, ascribing meaning to words based on their components
rather than their actual use in the language. (This led him several times to
disagree with every modern major translation!) He also sometimes referenced
English words derived from Greek terms, but in cases where the derivation is
irrelevant to the present meaning of the English word (e.g. *poem* from
*poiema*). Gladly, no major issues in the text hung on these cases. Nonetheless,
the misuses were distracting, and since in most cases they were also
unnecessary, they actually *weakened* the book for me.
  
That these are the only significant issues in such a large and thorough book is
a significant achievement, and both could readily be addressed in future
editions of the work. Taken as a whole, Davis' book shines. As Davis points out,
holiness necessarily entails both knowledge of the things of God and zeal for
his glory. The book drips with Davis' passion for God and his urgent desire that
God's people seek holiness, and it lays out a thoughtful and (most importantly)
Scriptural plan for how his people shall become holy. Lord willing, the volume
will be a reliable guide to sanctification for the church for years to come.

---

**Note on publication:** This paper was first published online on January 1,
2015. However, I wrote this and submitted it in mid-December, and have backdated
it accordingly.