Title: I Wrote It Wrong
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-07-12 20:07
Summary: A few lessons I learned from a previous blog post&mdash;rhetorical effectiveness in writing is a non-trivial endeavor to say the least.

I wrote a [blog post][post] earlier, and it seems I got it wrong (see the
[addendum][edit] at the end of the post). That is always an unpleasant
experience, to say the least.

[post]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/2014/dont-be-rude.html
[edit]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/2014/dont-be-rude.html#edit-and-addendum

The one upside to this whole affair? I took away two important lessons: The
first was a reminder to read others generously, even when frustrated with
them---a point I spelled out a bit in my [edit-and-addendum][edit] to the 
original post. The other about the effect of certain rhetorical structures in my
writing. The *idea* I had here was good (even if I may have misread the trigger
for writing the post in the first place), but it was badly executed, and there
were *structural* reasons for that, having to do with the weight and balance in
the original piece. What follows is just me self-critiquing in public: learning
about the process of writing "out loud", as it were.

Though the example I am critiquing is specifically a blog post, a lot of the
principles here apply equally to other media, including forms as varied as
long-form essays, preaching, lecturing, and even writing fiction.

#### My Goals

I meant the story I offered as an illustrative example of a broader point. To
wit, I had had a bad customer experience with a given company, and it left a bad
taste in my mouth that pushed me away from using that company's software in the
future. The story was meant to illustrate that even a single bad experience with
a company can emotionally outweight a lot of positive experience with the
company, and that emotions tend to fade slowly over time.

#### My Approach

I approached the piece with a fairly typical rhetorical structure for this kind
of thing: introduce a thesis or idea, detour through a specific example to
illustrate it, then come back and drive the main point home. This was a good
idea, but the execution failed, and it failed for fairly obvious reasons on
reflection.

#### The Problems

The first problem was the distribution of the content. The original piece was
right around a thousand words long. Of those, some six hundred words were
devoted to specific details of my interaction with the company in question.
Another hundred words had to do with my follow-up decisions about the products
involved. In the whole piece, then, I spent over two thirds of my time talking
about the specific example, and only about a third making the actual point I
wanted to make. This weighted the content so that the focus was on the details
of the story, rather than the bigger picture issue that I walked away with a bad
taste in my mouth from my interactions with the company's customer service
representative.

Second, the story itself was *far* too specific for my aims. I put in quotes
from our email exchange, which entirely distracted from the point I wanted to
make. It led readers to see whether they also perceived the emails as I had.
While this was helpful for leading me to reevaluate the content of the emails,
it also completely undercut the point of the post---a point, I should note,
whose validity is entirely independent of the details of the incident I used to
illustrate it. When I am illustrating a point, I need to let the illustration do
the work of *illustrating*, without letting the details of the illustration come
to the fore in this way. That means eliding all details but those actually
essential to make the point. The story isn't the point, nor are its details. It
is there to serve the end of the thesis, and nothing more. The minute it does
more than that, it needs to get out of the way.

#### Lesson learned

Those two issues combined to shift the rhetorical effect from what I
intended---a general discussion of the need to make sure you treat customers
with respect---to something else entirely. Instead of making my point, the
example distracted from it. I hope in the future to learn from this by doing two
things:

  - keeping the emphasis on arguing for the thesis, *not* on an illustration
    present only to personalize the thesis, especially by keeping the length of
    the illustration down.
  - keeping the details of any illustration used to the minimum essential to
    make the point at hand (whether illustrating the whole argument or just one
    part of it).