---
Title: Theology is Essential
Subtitle: We’re all theologians—including the seven-year-olds.
Summary: >
    Chatting with a seven-year-old is one sure way to highlight the need for all
    of us to be better theologians.
Date: 2014-04-06 20:30
...

Today, I spent a good part of my afternoon talking theology with a seven-year-
old. I was watching some friends' little girl, who is not yet a Christ-follower,
and our discussion ranged all over. We talked about everything from the bush-
climbing groundhog who appeared out the back door midway through our
conversation to the reason for the "blood" langauge throughout the Bible ("Eww!
Blood is disgusting!"), and from what happened in the Incarnation and the nature
of the Trinity to how hard it is to obey one's parents.

The conversation highlighted for me the necessity of learning theology. These
kinds of questions will come up in any family whose parents are seeking to point
their children to Jesus. The Bible has a lot of initially perplexing material in
it. Many of its concepts are foreign to *our* culture by dint of antiquity and
sociological differences between the ancient Hebrews and Greeks and modern
Westerners. Others are foreign to *all* cultures because of the Fall, and
require all of us to undergo the transformation that occurs in the renewal of
our minds as the Spirit sanctifies us. No surprise, then, that a seven-year-old
would be asking questions about these things: they are hard and confusing.

What is a surprise to me is how often I have heard these topics brushed aside as
inessential or secondary. The Trinity? Too complicated for ordinary folks. The
Incarnation? Just kind of a thing that had to happen so Jesus could die for us.
The blood language? Well, that's mostly just the Old Testament anyway. The
really important bits are that we tell people about Jesus and live basically
right!

Of course, the obvious questions are who this Jesus is and what it means to
"live right," and to answer these questions *at all* we have to deal in some
rather deep theological concerns. To live right is to live in accord with the
way of God in the world he made---but who is God, and how did he shape the
cosmos? As for the person of Jesus, any answer at all that wrestles with the
text of the Bible must soon confront both the ideas of the Trinity and the
Incarnation in short order.

And that's just for talking to a seven-year-old!

I wish that the picture I presented above were a caricature, an over-
simplification of more nuanced positions designed to make a rhetorical point
with some flourish, but it is not. In the Baptistic circles in which I travel,
there are *many* churches with explicitly anti-doctrinal stances. To be sure, we
have our share of churches that focus on doctrine to the exclusion of right
practice, but these are much less common in low-church contexts than their
opposite. "Doctrine divides," and we want "deeds not creeds," and that is all
there is to it---only it cannot be.

As has often been said, the question is not whether we are theologians, but what
sort of theologians we will be. All of us have our own understandings of God,
and these ideas are more or less in line with what Scripture says. Because God
is truly great, his revelation of himself pushes us to *think*. We refuse to
engage our critical faculties at our own peril.

I am not for a moment suggesting that my own particular brand of nerdiness ought
to be the standard by which Christians are judged. I am, however, deeply and
increasingly persuaded that a failure to think seriously about the contents of
our faith will result only in ruin and calamity in our people. We need blue-
collar men and women no less than erudite scholars to be comfortable explaining
the Trinity to their children and coworkers. We need not all be intellectual
sophisticates (Lord help us if we were), but we do all need to be a people
shaped by the intellectual depths of our faith. We need to be able to explain
our faith both so that we may teach outsiders and so that we may build one
another up and guard one another in the faith.

We need to be able to tell our seven-year-olds how it is that God became man and
why that would even matter. We need to understand ourselves how the one who was
totally pure became "disgusting" on our behalf in order to undo the brokenness
our rebellion introduced so we can tell that story to our children. We need to
grasp that the Trinity is not an ancillary doctrine to our faith, but one of its
bedrock affirmations, so that we can proclaim to our children and our neighbors
the God who is unending love within his own being---they will need this to make
sense of any of the other things we say about Jesus. And this I say not in some
abstract sense, but because I needed to be able to talk about all of those to
help my friends' little girl make a little more sense of the gospel *today*.
