Title: The Long Race
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-05-24 00:07
Tags: software development, family, fitness

It has been too long since I have written anything---too long not for my
audience (small as it is), but for my soul. The last few weeks of class were of
course even busier than the rest of the semester, courtesy of a couple major
assignments I wrapped up and studying for and taking finals, all while doing my
normal work as a software developer on the side. Writing simply fell by the
wayside, alas. Even my devotions posts simply didn't happen. And that is all
right; there are seasons for all of these things, and it is not as if I didn't
write many thousands of words in late April and early May. They simply were not
*blogging* words.

So here I am tonight, writing simply to unwind. I spent much of the day working
on various software projects---a pattern I expect to carry throughout the
summer. In addition to my regular work for Quest Consultants Inc. back in
Norman, I am picking up various web design and development jobs over the
summer. God has been gracious in answering prayers for opportunities to pick up
extra contracting work, and I have several really excellent opportunities to
supplement my 20 hours a week for Quest with other work. That is nice not only
financially, but also intellectually. The change of pace between different
kinds of work helps me stay fresh on all of them. My own personal [side
projects][io] are coming along slowly, but that is all right. Slow but steady
is the best way to go about those kinds of projects anyway.

[io]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/2014/a-little-crazy.html

That lesson is one I have learned more and more from my ongoing and
ever-increasing delight in running. So far in May I have run about 125 miles; I
expect to run over 150 miles this month in total (though of course all such
plans are always subject to revision, and never more so than when one's wife is
37 weeks pregnant). I am now running easy, aerobic miles ten to fifteen seconds
faster per mile than I could manage in my personal best half marathon time a
few years ago. I run so (relatively) quickly now not because of any particular
innate athleticism---quite the contrary, as anyone who has known me since high
school can attest. I can run as far and fast as I do only because I have stuck
with it and used a [smart training plan][markallen]. And really, as in most
parts of life, it is that sticking-with-it that leads to getting somewhere. Of
course, sticking with it is no guarantee that things will work out. It is
usually a requisite step along the way, though---a
necessary-though-insufficient condition. That is simply the way God built the
world.

[markallen]: http://markallenonline.com/maoArticles.aspx?AID=2 "Working Your Heart"

Little Ellie is quickly wrapping up her second year of life in this big world.
She is saying lots of words (at last!), whining until she has driven Jaimie a
bit crazy (in too-typical toddler fashion), and growing up in big ways and
small. We are having a great deal of fun watching her start to be more socially
aware and active, even if it is a little strange to have a daughter old enough
that she has friends whom she loves and who love her in turn. She has also
discovered a deep love of _Star Wars_---no surprise for a daughter of ours,
though the intensity of her delight in the movies, for a girl who is not yet
two years old, did surprise both Jaimie and me a bit. You should hear her try
to say "Darth Vader" or "Dark Side" or "Star Wars." It is impossibly adorable.

Jaimie is, as noted above, some 37 weeks pregnant and quite ready to be done
carrying our second little gal on the inside. She is still plugging away slowly
at the [second novella][shaking] in her [Bloodlines][ebook] fantasy trilogy.
She manages to keep Ellie entertained---no small feat---and does a remarkable
job taking care of things around the house so that I can focus on work and
school. Her struggle with [depression][ardentfidelity] has not diminished, but
God has given us grace to carry on and she and I have both learned to respond
in better, healthier, more helpful ways when the slumps come.

As for the future, we really have no idea what the next several yeras will
hold. I plan to finish my Master of Divinity---Lord willing, around December
2016. In the meantime, we will keep raising our little girls, I will keep
writing software, and we will keep exploring and seeing what we want to do and
how best to pursue those desires in a way that honors God. Who knows what those
years will hold? God only, and certainly not us.

[shaking]: http://jaimiekrycho.com/shaking-epheria-pt-1/ "Bloodlines: The Shaking of Epheria, Part I"

[ebook]: http://www.amazon.com/Bloodlines-Epheria-The-Trilogy-ebook/dp/B00HY478QO/ "Get Bloodlines of Epheria on Kindle!"

[ardentfidelity]: http://2012-2013.chriskrycho.com/theology/marriage-depression/ "Marriage and Depression"