Title: The State of Our Family in Early 2015
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2015-02-10 20:30
Tags: family, Ellie, Kate, Jaimie
Slug: early-2015-family

It has been a *long* time since I wrote a family update here, and I skipped the
Christmas letter this year because I was exhausted. I resolved at the beginning
of the year to write at least one update every month, though. I want these
updates here for *myself*, if for no other reason. (Then, of course, I promptly
missed January, but this is counting for that; there will be another post here
at the end of the month.)

What have we been up to, you ask? Well, quite a lot! Since the last time I wrote
a blog post, we had a baby, who is now crawling around. (If you're reading this,
you probably already know that, of course.) Ellie is talking, constantly
practicing saying things the right way and asking the names of things; Kate is
scooting around the floor exploring everything and is increasingly verbal
herself.

They love playing together. Ellie and Kate are good friends---a while back
Jaimie heard Ellie quietly talking to Katie in the back seat of the car,
repeating, "You're my best friend, Kate." Sometimes when Ellie gives Kate a hug
and a kiss goodnight every night, Kate goes into the most adorable squeals of
delight. Indeed, no one elicits those squeals as much as Ellie. In addition to
her scooting around the floor, Kate is happily eating solid foods---and the girl
*loves* her food. Today I put her in her high chair and she started laughing as
I put the tray in front of her. She often thumps the tray, the table, or the
floor to express her joy. And last but not least, this little gal is *strong*.
Her favorite time is getting in a bouncer and jumping for as long as we will let
her.

<figure>
<img src="/images/girls-games.jpg" title="My ladies playing Lego Star Wars"/>
<figcaption>My ladies playing <i>Lego Star Wars</i></figcaption>
</figure>

We have been teaching Ellie a lot. Jaimie has slowly started working through the
ABCs with her. She can count to 5, and she knows her way to 10, but sometimes
gets sidetracked along the way. She is learning her colors and spent a while
defaulting to calling everything "pink"... except for her favorite *purple*
dress. In the last month, she has started being able to identify the colors more
reliably, along with lots of shapes. She loves cars and trucks and especially
buses and fire trucks. She sings to herself and dances all the time. She loves
building with blocks. She is learning to say "please" and "thank
you"---learning, in this case, not because she doesn't know how but because she
has started *forgetting*. She is learning to pray and to sing to God and
learning the answer to simple questions like, "Who made you, Ellie?"

Jaimie has continued to write off and on, though the first many months we had
Kate it was much spottier than it had been. She's working on secret projects
that are making her happy, and that makes me happy.

As for why she didn't get as much time, I was *busy* last semester. I picked up
a second contract, building the new [HolyBible.com], and between that and my
ongoing contract work and my one class, I pulled a lot of 50--60 hour weeks.
That's not particularly an experience we are keen to repeat, but it was the
right call at the time: we were able to save up the money to fill up our
six-month emergency fund and to pay for the rest of seminary. This semester is
going a bit easier: I am taking Hebrew III and Baptist History and working ~30
hours a week instead of ~50--55. I *love* my language classes; without a doubt
Hebrew III and Greek III have been my very favorite classes since I started
seminary.

I ran another half marathon in November, and set a PR at 1:25:37---a 6:32/mile
pace. I was super happy with that outcome, and I plan to run the same race again
for the third year in a row this coming fall, Lord willing. In the meantime, I
have started swimming and cycling regularly with the aim of completing my first
triathlon early this summer. (I'm going to stick to a short "sprint" tri to
start, and work up from there.) While I love running, I would like to have the
use of my joints in twenty (and forty, and sixty) years, and accordingly I need
to make sure I do not keep putting over 1,000 miles a year on my legs. I have
been going to a spinning class to get my legs in better cycling shape for the
last month (and the last two weeks Jaimie has come with me!). We have also been
doing a Pilates class weekly; my back needs to be a lot stronger and my legs a
lot looser, and that is helping quite a bit.

We continue to be extremely happy in our church here, FBC Durham. God has used
our church to encourage and challenge us in a wide variety of ways---too many
(and perhaps in many cases too subtle) even to summarize. We are excited to see
what the years ahead hold for us there, as the church itself continues to
flourish and grow and we seek opportunities to continue serving and building up
this particular outpost of the body of Christ.

In short, life is *good*. It is not perfect, of course; I long for Jesus' return
and the New Heavens and New Earth more and more all the time. But we see God's
faithfulness and goodness in the hard months no less than in the easy ones. We
see the Spirit working in our hearts to make us more like Christ, and it is
good.

I could go on, but a thousand words is enough. More again, and sooner than the
last gap!

[HolyBible.com]: //holybible.com