---
Title: Why Should a Man Complain?
Subtitle: Syntax, Poetry, and Meaning in Lamentations 3:40–66
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2015-04-27 13:00
Category: theology
Tags: SEBTS, M. Div., papers
Template: formats/class
Class: Hebrew Syntax and Exegesis
Professor: Dr. Heath A. Thomas
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Summary: >
    An open-ended, multi-vocal answer to a rhetorical question—demonstrated by a
    close analysis of the structure, verbs, and poetic devices employed by the
    poet.
...

Author's Translation
====================

## *Nun* נ
40. Let us search out our ways and examine them thoroughly and let us return to Yahweh.
41. Let us lift our hearts with our hands to God in heaven.
42. "We have transgressed and rebelled---you have not forgiven!

## *Samech* ס
43. "You have shrouded yourself with anger, and you have pursued us; you have slain; you have not spared!
44. "You have shrouded yourself in a cloud so no prayer can pass through.
45. "You have made us refuse and waste in the midst of the peoples.

## *Pe* פ
46. "They have opened their mouths against us---all who are our enemies.
47. "Dread and death have come to us---devastation and ruination."
48. Channels of water run down from my eyes because of the ruination of the daughter of my people.

## *Ayin* ע
49. My eyes flow and do not cease; my eyes without respite,
50. Until he looks down and sees: Yahweh from heaven.
51. My eyes grieve my soul---from the state of all the daughters of my city.

## *Tsade* צ
52. Surely they hunted me like a bird---those who hated me for no reason.
53. They put an end to my life---in the pit!---and they cast stones at me.
54. Waters flowed over my head; I said, "I am destroyed."

## *Qof* ק
55. I cried out your name, oh Yahweh, from the deepest pit.
56. My voice you heard; you did not cover your ears to my relief---to my cry for help.
57. You came on the day I cried out to you; you said, "Do not be afraid!"

## *Resh* ר
58. You strove, Lord---strove even for my soul; you redeemed my life.
59. You see, oh Yahweh, the injustice done to me; judge my case!
60. You saw all their vengeance, all their conniving against me.

## *Sin/Shin* ש
61. You heard their reproach, oh Yahweh, all their conniving against me:
62. The speech of those who rise against me, and their plots against me every day.
63. Look at their sitting down and their rising up: I am their mockery-song.

## *Tav* ת
64. Bring back against them their due, oh Yahweh, according to the work of their hands.
65. Give them obstinate hearts; your curse be against them.
66. You pursue in anger, and you destroy them from beneath Yahweh's heavens.

---



Introduction
============

This essay will demonstrate that the concluding section of Lamentations 3,
running from v. 40 to v. 66, constitutes an open-ended, multivocal answer to the
question posed in Lamentations 3:39: “Why should a person complain, / a living
man concerning his sins?” The poet did not believe Yahweh demanded silence of
his people, even in the face of his judgment. Rather, his people were to trust
him deeply enough to call out to him, even when all evidence suggested he would
not answer. The point will be demonstrated by a close analysis of the structure,
verbs, and poetic devices employed throughout the text.


Outline
-------

 I.  [We repent but God has not forgiven us (40--51)]
       1. [Let us repent! (40--42a)]
       2. [God is still hidden (42b--44)]
       3. [We are devastated by our enemies (45--47)]
       4. [Sight and salvation (48--51)]
II.  [Deliver Me From My Enemies! (52--66)]
       1. [My enemies! Despair and pleading (52--55)]
       2. [Yahweh hears/May Yahweh hear (56--58)]
       3. [May Yahweh judge the enemies (59--66)]


[We repent but God has not forgiven us (40--51)]: #we-repent-but-god-has-not-forgiven-us-4051
[Let us repent! (40--42a)]: #let-us-repent-4042a
[God is still hidden (42b--44)]: #god-is-still-hidden-42b44
[We are devastated by our enemies (45--47)]: #we-are-devastated-by-our-enemies-4547
[Sight and salvation (48--51)]: #sight-and-salvation-4851
[Deliver Me From My Enemies! (52--66)]: #deliver-me-from-my-enemies-5266
[My enemies! Despair and pleading (52--55)]: #my-enemies!-despair-and-pleading-5255
[Yahweh hears/May Yahweh hear (56--58)]: #yahweh-hearsmay-yahweh-hear-5658
[May Yahweh judge the enemies (59--66)]: #may-yahweh-judge-the-enemies-5966


Authorship
----------

Lamentations has traditionally been attributed to Jeremiah, but the poems
themselves make no claim to authorship whatsoever.[^1] Jeremianic authorship is
possible, and a few commentators continue to argue for it as a reasonable
assumption.[^2] However, while there are commonalities in style and vocabulary
between the books of Jeremiah and Lamentations,[^3] and no outright
contradictions between the two books,[^4] there are also significant differences
between them. Jeremiah predicted the destruction of the city and the temple
while the author of Lamentations seems surprised by it, and Jeremiah strongly
emphasizes the sins of the people while the author of Lamentations hardly
mentions them.[^5] These differences in perspective might be the result of the
prophet's experience of the fall of Jerusalem as opposed to merely the
anticipation thereof, but more likely whoever composed the book "was familiar
with the book of Jeremiah, but had his own vocabulary to express grief over the
fall of Jerusalem."[^6]

Some commentators argue not only against Jeremianic authorship but for multiple
authorship.[^7] Such a reading is hardly required, however. The suggestion that
variation in perspective or even poetic style can *only* be explained by
multiple authorship badly underestimates the range of human artistry.[^8] Poetic
voice is not the same as *authorial* voice;[^9] the multiple voices which appear
throughout the book are "poetic vehicles through which the poet speaks
throughout"[^10] rather than multiple authors arguing for differing theologies.
Even if Lamentations is the product of multiple poets, the poems ultimately
represent continuity of thought and theology, both individually and
collectively.[^11] Together, they present a multivocal but coherent expression
of grief in the face of horrific tragedy.


Context
-------

### Geographical and Cultural

Lamentations was composed in response to the Babylonian destruction of Jerusalem
and its temple and the deportation of Judean leadership in 595--587 B.C.
However, it is not clear how long after the fall of Jerusalem the poems were
composed, nor whether they were composed simultaneously or with some gaps
between them. The book was probably composed prior to the rebuilding of the
temple in 515 B.C., since the text includes no hint of such a hopeful turn of
events,[^12] but the author's imaginative and lyrical skill count for more than
his proximity to the events he describes.[^13] In any case, the date of
composition is largely irrelevant to the interpretation of the text.[^14]

Like the rest of the Hebrew Bible, Lamentations adopts from but freely adapts
genres from the surrounding cultures. Accordingly, it includes elements of
Ancient Near East city laments, communal laments, and communal dirges.[^15]
Records of city laments in the greater Mesopotamian region date to the beginning
of the second millennium B.C., and the author of Lamentations joined various
prophetic writers in the Old Testament in repurposing the form for his
theological purposes.[^16] Whereas most city-laments appear to have been created
for rededications of temples and thus include the imagery of a god's return to
the temple, Yahweh is conspicuously absent and his temple in ruins throughout
Lamentations.[^17] Moreover, the theology of Lamentations differs significantly
from the city-laments. Though the poet gives full voice to doubt and anger
towards Yahweh throughout the book, he ultimately places moral responsibility
not on Yahweh but on the sinning people of Jerusalem, very much unlike the
anti-theodic bent of other city laments.[^18] The text mingles "penitence *and*
protest, confession *and* lament."[^19]

### Literary

The book consists of five poems, each sharing the same basic acrostic structure.
Chapters 1, 2, and 4 each have twenty-two multi-line verses, each beginning with
a consecutive letter of the Hebrew alphabet.[^20] Chapter 3 changes the pattern,
devoting three single-line verses to each letter. Finally, chapter 5 consists of
another twenty-two verses of poetry, but does not include the acrostic lettering
scheme. The acrostics draw the reader forward through the text[^21] and express
a sense of completion at their conclusion: grief has been fully sounded and
emotional and theological catharsis experienced.[^22] The poet *imposes* order
on a world in chaos by choosing to "express the inexpressible... [in poems]
whose controlling structural device is the very letters that signify and give
shape to language."[^23] Moreover, the repetition of letters, as of words and
ideas throughout the poem, "introduces the indispensable element of *time*:
reflection and re-reflection on the meaning of the aesthetic message."[^24] At
the same time, the frequent use of enjambment both works with the acrostic to
propel the reader forward through the text[^25] and undermines the poetry's
regularity, allowing the poet to control the pace of the poem "without relying
on emplottment [sic] or even strong characterization."[^26] These large-scale
poetic devices together shape not only the structure but also the message of the
poetry: lines give different senses when read alone than when read in their
acrostic strophe, and different again when read in the full sequence.[^27] They
ultimately "draw the reader into a variety of responses... [not] one particular
response."[^28]

Lamentations 3 is the theological and poetic center of the book.[^29] Although
some modern commentators hesitate to affirm the centrality of the chapter
because of a tendency to downplay the lament elsewhere in the book,[^30] there
are good reasons to take this view. Structurally, the center is often important
to Hebrew poetry, and while that importance can be overstated, the placement of
the poem here should not be ignored---especially when its poetry and content
differ from the others in such a notable way.[^31] The increased repetition
heightens the effect and draws attention to the content of the poetry.[^32] The
shorter lines are visually and aurally arresting. The chapter includes theodic
content and, at times, a hopeful tone---kinds of content absent in the rest of
the poems. It is also the only poem in which words are attributed to
Yahweh.[^33] The literary and theological emphasis the poet placed on this
chapter is not a reason to ignore the message of the other chapters, but neither
should it be ignored in interpreting them.

The chapter has three major sections, though commentators divide them in
slightly different ways; the exegesis below analysis assumes the following
division. In the first section (vv. 1--18), "the man who has seen affliction"
(3:1) laments his individual suffering at God's hands. The second section (vv.
19--39) emphasizes Yahweh's covenant love, trustworthy character, and hatred of
injustice; it is the most hopeful and theodic passage in the book. In the third
section (vv. 40--66), the speaker responds to the theodic ideas outlined in the
second with a complex mix of complaint, lament, hope, and imprecation. This
concluding turn has led some commentators to suggest the speaker ultimately
could not believe the ethical/theodic message,[^35] or that he was angrily
determined to "speak in the face of Yahweh's silence;"[^36] it has led others to
suggest competing authors (see above). But "[the] speaker is not
schizophrenic."[^37] The same person may simultaneously recognize his own sinful
responsibility, trust God, and yet remain long for deliverance from and be
troubled by his suffering.[^38] Though all of these themes appear scattered
throughout the book, Lamentations 3 alone draws them together in a single poem.

The final section begins in v. 40. Although there are later topical and vocal
shifts (especially in v. 42; see below), none are as strong as the one leading
the נ-strophe, which is doubly marked. The speaker shifts from general
statements about Yahweh to exhortation of the listening community precisely at
the transition from the מ-strophe to the נ-strophe. Indeed, given the enjambment
across strophe boundaries typical of the final section of the poem,[^39] the
alignment here clearly indicates a major transition in the poem.

Exegesis
========

We Repent but God Has Not Forgiven Us (40--51)
----------------------------------------------

The speaker has finished his discourse on who Yahweh is and how he acts; now it
is time to respond. In light of the preceding declaration of Yahweh's covenant
love and justice, and its "emphasis on confession and penitence"[^40] the
speaker urges his people to turn and repent. He turns almost immediately to a
lengthy lament, however: God has not forgiven. Indeed, the divine warrior has
struck down his own people.[^41] Things seems hopeless.

### Let us repent! (40--42a)

If Yahweh's covenant love may be trusted and he judges rightly, and if his
people have sinned, they ought to repent. The speaker employs the language of
(especially Jeremianic) prophetic exhortation, calling the people to search out
and examine their ways and return to Yahweh.[^42] Unlike in Jeremiah, though,
the speaker includes himself in the call to repentance. The opening verbs of the
section are not imperatives but cohortatives (נַחְפְּשָׂ֤ה, נַחְקֹ֔רָה,
נָשׁ֖וּבָה). The speaker thus affirms that his and his people's sin has led to
their current condition; they must repent. The imperfect that follows (נִשָּׂ֤א)
picks up the force of the preceding cohortatives and continues the exhortation.
The language of "hearts with hands" reminds the reader that the repentance
required is an act of the whole person: neither merely internal nor merely
external.[^43] The reference to "God in heaven" does double duty: it marks his
authority to forgive, but it also suggests his absence from Zion.

### God is still hidden (42b--44)

In the following verses, the author begins by confessing sin, then addresses
Yahweh, who has not forgiven his people, and who has instead opposed them and
hidden himself from their prayers. Israel's divine warrior-God has now become
her enemy.[^44] The God whose presence with his people was so often manifest as
a cloud[^45] has now removed his presence from them with a cloud.[^46] The
people may confess, but unless Yahweh hears their prayers and answers them, they
will remain destitute and hopeless.[^47] In light of the speaker's confession
and the hope expressed in the preceding major section, that Yahweh has not
forgiven comes as a surprise, and one intensified dramatically by the poetry.

In fact, the poetry here is enjambed twice, making it one of the more prominent
of the many instances of the poetic device throughout this section of the
poem.[^48] First, the poet introduces the address to Yahweh at the end of the
נ-strophe instead of at beginning of the ס-strophe. Second, the poet splits the
line itself. The first verset continues the thought of the preceding two lines:
the people's repentance before God, in the form of confession: "we have
transgressed and rebelled." The second verset indicates God's response: "---you
have not forgiven!" There is no transition, not even a disjunctive-ו to mark the
shift---just a terse pair of statements. Indeed, the effect is so jarring,
especially as it leads into the next strophe, that it is tempting to read the
entire rest of the poem as accusation against and anger against God.[^49]
Understandable as this reading is---especially as a backlash against the
inappropriate suppression of lament among Christians---it is mistaken, as will
become clear.[^50] The speaker *does* complain here and in what follows, but
that is not all he does.

Because of the tonal shift between v. 42a and v. 42b, it is possible to read
this as the break between the second and third major sections of the book. As
noted above, the major discourse boundary is between vv. 39 and 40 instead,
where the speaker transitions from exposition to response. There *is* a segue
here, as the speaker turns his attention from his community to Yahweh, and
begins a speech section that runs through v. 47, but this transition is within
rather than between sections---from one kind of response to another.

### We are devastated by our enemies (45--47)

Once again, the poet employs enjambment to drive the reader into the speaker's
experience of suffering. The transition between the ס- and פ-strophes occurs in
v. 46, but already in v. 45 the speaker returns to a theme expressed in the
beginning of the chapter as well as in the preceding poems: enemies attacking
the people of God. Not only is Yahweh absent from Zion, but he has made her like
refuse and waste[^51] in the midst of the peoples. The tribes he had chosen to
be a blessing to the nations (Gen. 12:3; 18:17--19) and set apart as a kingdom
of priests (Exod. 19:6; Deut. 17:18) were defilement---things to be thrown out
of the camp (cf. Exod. 29:14). Moreover, rather than delivering from enemies,
God has brought them against his people.[^52] They have "opened their mouths"
against God's people, an image used in the Wisdom literature both of speaking
against someone and of devouring them (Job 29:23; Ps. 5:9; 22:13; 35:21). The
climax of the quotation comes in verse 47, a chiasm on two pairs of words which
rhyme almost completely.[^53] "Dread and death, devastation and
ruination"---this is what Yahweh has accomplished in bringing these enemies
against his people.

This judgment may not have been unexpected---everything that happened to
Jerusalem was expressly the result of a covenant curse---but the circumstances
were no less horrific for that. That the judgment was deserved did not lessen
the urgency of the speaker's cry for relief.[^54] The speaker's complaint raises
the poem's tension by pitting this lament against the theodic material which
precedes it.[^55] The speaker may not be shaking his fist at the heavens, but he
is certainly complaining loudly and questioning insistently. If Yahweh is
loving, faithful, and just, is this judgment not too harsh? At this point, the
ethical vision expressed in vv. 19--39 seems lost. Indeed, Miriam Bier and F. W.
Dobbs-Allsopp both suggest that the poet *wants* to embrace the ethical vision,
but that this and the section following demonstrate his inability to do so.[^56]
Were this the final note of the poem, this analysis would be basically correct.
It is not, but things get worse before they get better.

### Sight and salvation (48--51)

The speaker echoes the end of v. 47 at the end of v. 48, tying the two together,
but shifts in person (from "we" to "I").[^57] The identity of the speaker shifts
slightly as a result: he spoke first for himself alone, then exhorted his
community, and now stands in solidarity with the community of Zion.[^58] The
poet connects these verses, from the last line of the פ-strophe through the
whole ע-strophe, with the idea of eyes and sight. The poet's eyes pour out
channels of water and flow without ceasing or respite, until Yahweh looks and
sees. The poet and his people desperately need Yahweh's deliverance---and Yahweh
remains enthroned in heaven. The poet carefully reiterates the idea suggested in
the נ-strophe, delaying the subject of v. 50 to the second half of the line to
match the structure of v. 41. The inclusio emphasizes both Yahweh's sovereignty
and his distance from his people.

Until Yahweh sees---until he stops shrouding himself from his people's prayers
and hears their cries as he did in Exodus 1---the poet's eyes continue to
torment him because of the sad state of the women of the city (v. 51). The final
line is curiously expressive: the speaker's eyes are harsh to his soul---a
phrase that has been taken to mean that his eyes literally ache from his crying
and that the things he sees torment him.[^59] In fact, the terse language
suggests both: in the immediate context, the speaker's weeping wears him out;
more broadly, soul-distressing suffering is nearly omnipresent in these poems.
Although he clearly hopes for change, he is no longer addressing Yahweh as of v.
48. He simply states how things are and will remain until God acts: these
horrors demand grief. And perhaps Yahweh will hear these tears, even if he seems
to have heard nothing else (though nothing in the context or language here
suggests these tears are meant to *manipulate* God into responding).[^60] The
section closes without any such response, though; all hope seems lost.


Deliver me from my enemies! (52--66)
------------------------------------

The concluding section is like an individual psalm of lament.[^61] It continues
the shift begun in v. 19. The chapter (as well as the book) opens with the image
of God as a divine warrior fighting against his people, but it concludes with a
plea for God to act in line with his character.[^62] The speaker hopes that
Yahweh will restore his people to covenant unity with him and defend them from
their enemies, but refuses to collapse the tension between hope and lament that
characterizes the whole poem.

### Excursus: Verb Tense and Meaning in Poetry

The verb tense throughout the final section of the poem is a subject of much
debate. Commentators differ especially on how to take the mix of perfects and
imperfects in vv. 56--58, but significant differences appear beginning as early
as v. 52. Some take the verbs to be a mix of past statement and present need or
imperative,[^63] but this does not account for the ongoing nature of the
speaker's distress (as indicated by the imperatives in the following
section).[^64] Others read both the perfects and imperfects as a series of
present-tense declarations of faith.[^65] This view rightly captures the sense
of present distress, but does not account for the perfect-imperfect alternation
and has no basis for distinguishing between these "present-tense" perfects and
the ordinary past-tense perfects that precede them. Thus, some suggest that the
perfects carry a precative sense, with the imperfects then naturally reading as
more imperatives.[^66] In addition to being an unusual and debated syntactical
stance, however, this also fails to answer why the poet did not use simple
imperatives (as in vv. 59, 63). Even if these verbs simply represent the poet
shifting to the perfect-imperfect alternation common to poetry,[^67] this is the
only place in the entire final section of the poem where the pattern appears. At
the least, it marks the sequence by distinction with the surrounding verses.
Thus, none of the proposals satisfactorily account for all the features of the
text, though perfect-as-precative is not unreasonable.

It is possible, of course, that this ambiguity is a function only of modern
scholars' relative ignorance of the language---that native speakers readily took
in the meaning of the poetry when Lamentations was written. It is equally
plausible, however, that the poet *intended* the meaning to remain elusive. This
is one of the functions of poetry: to push the boundaries of what language can
express and thereby convey feeling and sense beyond the merely literal. The poet
in Lamentations employs a wide array of tools to this end in this final section
of the poem, including structure (the acrostic), enjambment, rhythm, rhyme and
assonance, ellipsis, and allusion. Perhaps the poet wanted audience to wonder:
has Yahweh delivered already, spoken already, judged the enemies already---or is
the speaker still waiting for Yahweh to hear his prayers? In the world of faith,
the answer may be *both*: the believer may be fully confident that Yahweh's
answer is assured, and still feel no less keenly the fact that experience does
not yet bear out that answer. The text is open; it not only allows for but
actively invites both readings.[^68] "[Both] past and future signify the
ongoing present. The suffering in Lamentations is timeless, and the expression
of timelessness seems to have been one of the poet’s goals."[^69]

### My enemies! Despair and pleading (52--55)

The צ-strophe opens with a stereotyped image of the beleaguered servant of God:
the person hunted like a bird (cf. Prov. 6:5; Pss. 11:1, 124:7, 140:5) by those
who hated him for no reason (cf. 1 Sam. 19:15, 25:31; Ps. 35:7, 69:5). The
strophe continues with a description of the enemies' depredations. The
circuitous language (literally, they put an end to his life, with the action
occurring in a pit) conveys the idea of people seeking to end his life by
throwing him into a pit and hurling stones at him (cf. Pss. 18:41, 73:27,
94:23).[^70] The image is not a dry pit like the ones Joseph and Jeremiah were
thrown into (Gen. 38:24; Jer. 38:6). Instead, water went up over the speaker's
head (cf. Ps: 69:1--2). Besides being yet more stock lament imagery,[^71] the
water language connects this sequence back to the preceding one, even as the
focus has changed. So likewise with the "pit" language, whose implied
metaphorical use as a substitute for death or the grave[^72] is heightened by
proximity to v. 47, where it is used precisely that way. The poetry is also
enjambed again much as it was at the end of the נ-strophe. The first half of the
line in v. 54 continues the complaint theme of the preceding verses, but the
latter half begins a recitation of speech to and interaction with Yahweh. The
poet carries this theme further as he begins the ק-strophe (v. 55) with the
speaker's having cried out Yahweh's name from the "deepest pit," a phrase
suggestive of Sheol.[^73]

Nothing about these verses is particularly striking or unusual next to other
laments in the Old Testament, and this is in its own way significant. The
speaker has made a small but meaningful change in his language and tone: Yahweh
is no longer the enemy but instead the one who might deliver *from* the
enemies.[^74] The turn to traditional, even stereotyped, language of lament and
petition signals the speaker's self-conscious identification with Israel's
history of trusting Yahweh for deliverance. This does not mark the resolution of
the trial, but it does undercut the idea that the end of the poem is
unrelentingly pessimistic---especially when coupled with the verses that follow.

### Yahweh hears/May Yahweh hear (56--58)

The next sequence (continuing the ק-strophe and running into the first line of
the ר-strophe) is a striking sequence and is key to understanding the poet's
intent in the final section of the poem. The speaker proclaims Yahweh's response
to his call for help from the edge of death. Per the discussion above, this
section is best read as holding together the tensions of past-and-future,
actual-and-desired: "you heard my voice" and "hear my voice" (v. 56); "you came
on the day I called" and "come on the day I call," "you said to me" and "say to
me" (v. 57); "you strove for my life" and "strive for my life" (v. 58). This is
the climax of the final section, the place where the poet's pleas climax and,
more significantly, the only place in the entire book where Yahweh speaks. The
words the poet attributes to Yahweh are simple---אַל־תִּירָֽא, "do not
fear"---but pack depths into their brief syllables. For the canonically
attentive reader, these words immediately call to mind all the places Yahweh
tells his people not to fear, and where he inevitably promised his presence and
his aid to his people against their enemies.[^75] Yet the poet elides the second
part.

It is impossible to take the poet's intended sense without paying attention to
"the way in which the sequence as a whole coheres and interacts, and even to how
the poet articulates theological interests."[^76] This allusion grounds the
final segment of the poem in a measure of hope. At the same time, by leaving the
promise of Yahweh's presence merely an allusion, rather than stating it straight
out, the poet carefully sustains the tension between *already* and *not-yet*
that drives the conclusion of the poem. Turn the phrases one way, and the
speaker is pleading for God to comfort his people by making his presence known;
turn them the other and the speaker is proclaiming that this is precisely what
God has already done. Both perspectives affirm the community's need for
deliverance and for Yahweh's presence to return; but the poetry hangs between
the two, unresolved. The poet has left both readings possible, perhaps even
necessary. Complaint remains,[^77] yet Israel's hope that Yahweh was and would
be with them remains, too.[^78]

### May Yahweh judge the enemies (59--66)

The poem concludes with the resumption of the speaker's complaint about the
enemies, followed by an imprecatory prayer against them; both the complaint and
the imprecation echo the imprecatory psalms.[^79] The only two imperatives
proper in vv. 40--66 appear here: the speaker pleads with God to judge his case
(v. 59) and to observe his enemies' actions (v. 63). In the complaint, which
takes up the final line of the ר-strophe and the entire ש-strophe, he lists out
his enemies' offenses. They sought (unwarranted) vengeance on, connived against,
reproached, rose up against, slandered, plotted against, and made a mockery of
him (cf. 14:16--17, 23:7).[^80] The lines are terse and elliptical, with verbs
few and far between; the result reads like a list of charges in a court case,
crying out for a verdict.[^81]

The imprecatory prayer comprises the ת-strophe, where a series of imperfects
take up an imperatival force. The only unusual item in the list is the phrase
translated "obstinate hearts," מְגִנַּת, a hapax which appears only here and may
be derived from מָגֵן, "shield." Literally, the speaker asks for Yahweh to give
them something like "covering-of-heart"---the idea seems to be hard-heartedness
(thus "obstinate")---so that the enemies will receive the judgment they are due
(cf. Exo. 7:3,13).[^82] These imprecations are not merely selfish requests for
personal vengeance. Rather, they are a plea for Yahweh to execute divine
justice, in line with his character as speaker described it in the middle
section of the poem.[^83] It is not that the poet thinks that his proclamation
of faith resolved everything. Instead, echoing both the Psalms and
Jeremiah,[^85] the speaker implores Yahweh for deliverance, confident that God
*can* help but desperately needing that ability to become action.[^86]


Conclusion
----------

The poem ends on an unresolved note, unlike most of the psalms of imprecation or
lament (notable exceptions including Pss. 44, 60).[^87] But this is appropriate
to the poet's aims. He presents not a cheery resolve to act as though everything
is better in light of the ethical and theodic vision presented in vv. 19--39,
but rather an attempt to apply that vision when circumstances remain
unchanged.[^88] The result is closure, but not resolution. The acrostic is
complete, and the speaker's grief has been expiated to a degree---but until
things are right again, pleading and lament remain. Yahweh may be good and his
judgments righteous, but that does not require his people's silence when he
punishes them. To the contrary, it allows them to express their grief and anger
in the hope of a merciful and gracious response from their covenant God.

This reading makes sense of the shape of the poem as a whole. Because of the
brighter notes sounded in vv. 19--39, a few commentators take this poem as
ending positively.[^89] Others take the final 26 verses as a negative response
to the (apparently) rhetorical questions posed in vv. 36--39.[^90] Neither of
these readings does justice to the tension of the poetry. Instead, the poet has
played the enjambment card again, at a yet larger level. The final (originally
rhetorical) question of the middle section actually received an answer: Why
should a man complain about the punishment of his sins? Because even when the
judgment was deserved, Yahweh may yet answer, silence the enemy, and draw near
to his people. In one sense, he already has; in another, his people are still
waiting---and the poet leaves it at that.


Application
===========

In recent decades, scholars have applied Lamentations to everything from
Freudian grief models[^91] to massive national tragedies.[^92] The Freudian
model of grief has some serious deficiencies---but applications of Lamentations
3 in that context do help people both to articulate their grief and  to respond
to loss.[^93] Application to national tragedies is even more appropriate. The
20th and 21st centuries have seen horrific loss of life; even in largely
untouched America, community has disintegrated over the same period. Thus, "the
unrelenting relevance of this poetry cries out to be heard and understood."[^94]
Reading Lamentations more frequently and deeply will help Western Christians
understand the trials of fellow believers enduring persecution for the name of
Christ. It will also provide a framework for sympathizing with peoples around
the world facing ethnic cleansing or other such horrors.

These realities are painful, but they are realities nonetheless. With some of
the Psalms, Lamentations addresses human suffering head-on as few other places
in Scripture do, pointing the way to a deep, rich, honest, and trusting response
to tragedy. The concluding section of chapter 3 is particularly helpful: God
sometimes delays his deliverance; repentance does not always lead immediately to
restoration; and the enemies of God's people go on harassing them far longer
than seems right. In those moments, people and their pastors have a model to
follow: crying out to God as long as his answer remains *already-but-not-yet*.
Believers ought to spend time reading, meditating on, and praying through these
words. Pastors should acquaint themselves with the book deeply so they can
minister to their congregants facing trials, and they should preach on it more
often to equip their congregations for those trials.

Lamentations 3:40--66 represents an invitation to cry out to God even in the
midst of judgment---to believe that he may yet hear. In their hesitation to
voice this kind of lament at in the face of life's travails, many Christians
reveal that they do not know their God as well as they ought. "The suffering is,
as it were, an affirmation that God is still there and still concerned with the
fate of Israel. He may hide his face, but he has not ceased to be Israel’s
God."[^95] If even God's judgment on Israel was a painful picture of his
faithfulness, how much more when he has shared our griefs, borne our sufferings
in his own flesh, and been judged to the point of crying out, "My God, my God,
why have you forsaken me?" And so he remains open to his people's cries---for,
until suffering ends, lament remains.


[^1]: Paul House, "Lamentations," in _Song of Songs / Lamentations_, vol. 23B of
    Word Biblical Commentary (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2004), 284; F. W.
    Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, Interpretation (Louisville: John Knox Press,
    2002), 4; Tremper Longman III, _Jeremiah, Lamentations_, New International
    Biblical Commentary (Peabody: Hendrickson Publishers, 2008), 328.

[^2]: So F. B. Huey, _Jeremiah, Lamentations_, vol. 16 of The New American
    Commentary (Nashville: Broadman & Holman Publishers, 1993), 442--443, who
    acknowledges no biblical truth is at stake in the affirmation.

[^3]: House, 286; Hetty Lalleman, _Jeremiah and Lamentations_, Tyndale Old
    Testament Commentaries (Downers Grove: InterVarsity Press, 2013), 320-–321.

[^4]: Rightly, House, 289.

[^5]: Adele Berlin, _Lamentations: A Commentary_, The Old Testament Library
    (Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2002), 31--32.

[^6]: Lalleman, 322.

[^7]: So Nancy C. Lee, _The Singers of Lamentations: Cities Under Siege, from Ur
    to Jerusalem to Sarajevo..._, vol. 60 of Biblical Interpretation Series
    (Leiden: Brill, 2002), 11, 48--49, 51; and see Heath A. Thomas, _Poetry and
    Theology in the Book of Lamentations_, Hebrew Bible Monographs, 47
    (Sheffield: Sheffield Pheonix Press, 2013), 10--11 and House, 295 for
    summaries of and responses to suggested redactive possibilities.

[^8]: Rightly, Iain Provan, _Lamentations_, New Century Bible Commentary (Grand
    Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 1991), 16; Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 5.

[^9]: Provan, _Lamentations_, 18.

[^10]: Longman, 329.

[^11]: Norman K. Gottwald, _Studies in the Book of Lamentations_ (Chicago: Alec
    R. Allenson, Inc., 1954), 20--21.

[^12]: Thomas, 8--9.

[^13]: Rightly, Provan, _Lamentations_, 12.

[^14]: Longman, 330.

[^15]: Thomas, 79.

[^16]: Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 9.

[^17]: Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 10--12, 29.

[^18]: House, 310--314; Lalleman, 325-326.

[^19]: Thomas, 3; emphasis original.

[^20]: Save that the order of פ and ע are flipped in chs. 2--4 (Gottwald, 24).

[^21]: Gottwald, 28--29; Thomas, 82.

[^22]: F. W. Dobbs-Allsopp, "Tragedy, Tradition, and Theology in the Book of
    Lamentations," _Journal For The Study Of The Old Testament_ no. 74 (June 1,
    1997), 58; Gottwald, 28--30.

[^23]: Berlin, 5.

[^24]: Thomas, 84 (emphasis original).

[^25]: F. W. Dobbs-Allsopp, "The enjambing line in Lamentations: a taxonomy.
    (Part 1)," _Zeitschrift Für Die Alttestamentliche Wissenschaft_ 113, no. 2
    (January 1, 2001), 221--223; ibid. "The effects of enjambment in
    Lamentations. (part 2)," _Zeitschrift Für Die Alttestamentliche
    Wissenschaft_ 113, no. 3 (January 1, 2001), 370--371; cf. Berlin, 5; House,
    428.

[^26]: Dobbs-Allsopp, "The effects of enjambment (part 2)," 373.

[^27]: ibid., 383--384.

[^28]: Thomas, 3.

[^29]: ibid., 5.

[^30]: So Miriam Bier, "'We have sinned and rebelled; you have not forgiven':
    the dialogic interaction between authoritative and internally persuasive
    discourse in Lamentations 3," _Biblical Interpretation_ 22, no. 2 (January
    1, 2014), 148--149; Dobbs-Allsopp, "Tragedy, Tradition, and Theology," 37;
    Tod Linafelt, _Suriving Lamentations: Catastrophe, Lament, and Protest in
    the Afterlife of a Biblical Book_ (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press,
    2000), 3,9,10.

[^31]: Longman, 340.

[^32]: Gottwald, 30; Lalleman, 353; Thomas, 83.

[^33]: Lalleman, 362. How to take Yahweh's speech is an open question; see below.

[^35]: So Bier, 162--163;

[^36]: Dobbs-Allsopp, "Tragedy, Tradition, and Theology," 55--56.

[^37]: House, 430.

[^38]: ibid.

[^39]: F. W. Dobbs-Allsopp, "The effects of enjambment (part 2)," 374.

[^40]: Thomas, 194.

[^41]: Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 30, 123; Longman, 336.

[^42]: Cf. Jer. 2:23, 3:12, 6:16, 15:19.

[^43]: House, 421.

[^44]: Dobbs-Allsopp, "Tragedy, Tradition, and Theology," 38; ibid.,
    _Lamentations_, 30; Longman, 336.

[^45]: Cf. Exo. 13:21; 14:20,24; 19:9,16; 24:15--18; 33:9--10; 34:5; 40:34--38;
    Num. 9:15--22; 1 Ki. 8:10--11.

[^46]: Berlin, 96; Longman, 373.

[^47]: Berlin, 96.

[^48]: See Dobbs-Allsopp, "The enjambing line (part 1)" and ibid., "The effects
    of enjambment (part 2)" for a partial list.

[^49]: So Bier, 162--163; Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 123; ibid., "Tragedy,
    Tradition, and Theology," 48; Provan, _Lamentations_, 84.

[^50]: So, rightly, Longman, 339.

[^51]: The word translated "waste" here is a hapax; BDB gives "scum," but the
    other versions (LXX, Syriac, etc.) differ (Provan, _Lamentations_, 100--101).

[^52]: Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 123--124; ibid., "Tragedy, Tradition, and
    Theology," 38.

[^53]: Berlin, 3; she rightly notes that most English translations exchange the
    rhyme for alliteration, which is a distinct poetic technique with a very
    different effect.

[^54]: Berlin, 18--19. On the covenant curses and Lamentations, see also
    Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 41; Gottwald, 47; Lalleman, 329; Longman,
    337--338.

[^55]: Thomas, 195--196.

[^56]: Bier, 146--147, 153--154, 162--163; Dobbs-Allsopp, "Tragedy, Tradition,
    and Theology," 48--49.

[^57]: Dobbs-Allsopp, “Tragedy, Tradition, and Theology,” 41.

[^58]: Thomas, 196, 198.

[^59]: Provan, _Lamentations_, 103.

[^60]: So, rightly, Longman, 374; Provan, _Lamentations_, 82; contra
    Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 125; Gottwald, 93.

[^61]: House, 425; Lalleman, 361.

[^62]: Thomas, 197.

[^63]: So House, 426; Provan, _Lamentations_, 83.

[^64]: Lalleman, 362; Thomas, 200--201.

[^65]: Lalleman, 361, following Renkema, 451--452.

[^66]: Berlin, 97; Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 126; Longman, 375--376;
    Provan, _Lamentations_, 105--106; ibid., "Past, present and future in
    Lamentations 3:52-66 : the case for a precative perfect re-examined," _Vetus
    Testamentum_ 41, no. 2 (April 1, 1991): 164-175. _ATLA Religion Database
    with ATLASerials_, EBSCO_host_ (accessed April 26, 2015); Thomas, 198.

[^67]: As suggested by Berlin, 3.

[^68]: See Thomas, 200--202, 210--211.

[^69]: Berlin, 3.

[^70]: Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 126; Thomas, 197.

[^71]: On the lament imagery used throughout the section, see Dobbs-Allsopp,
    _Lamentations_, 126; Lalleman, 362; Longman, 375; Provan, _Lamentations_,
    105.

[^72]: Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 127; Thomas, 197.

[^73]: Cf. Ps. 86:13, where תַּחְתִּיּֽוֹת is used in an identical construction with
    שְּׁא֥וֹל substituted for בּ֖וֹר.

[^74]: Thomas, 197, 203.

[^75]: See Gen. 26:24, 46:3--4; Num. 21:34; Deut. 1:21; Jsh. 8:1, 10:8, 11:6;
    Jdg. 6:23; 2 Kng. 19:6--7; Isa. 41:10,14, 43:1,5; Jer. 1:8, 30:10--11,
    46:27--28; and cf. Gen. 15:1; 2 Kng. 6:16; Isa. 7:4, 10:24--27, 37:6, 44:2.

[^76]: Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 6.

[^77]: So, rightly, Thomas, 200--202.

[^78]: So rightly, Thomas, 210; cf. also Berlin, 18--19.

[^79]: See Lalleman, 363; Provan, _Lamentations_, 108.

[^80]: Gottwald, 79--80.

[^81]: Berlin, 97; Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 127.

[^82]: See Longman, 378; Provan, _Lamentations_, 109.

[^83]: Berlin, 98--99; Lalleman, 363.

[^85]: See Lalleman, 363.

[^86]: Berlin, 97--98; House, 429.

[^87]: Longman, 331.

[^88]: Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, 127, steps partway in this direction; cf.
    Thomas, 203.

[^89]: See especially Gottwald, 30, 99.

[^90]: See e.g. Bier, 162--163; Dobbs-Allsopp, _Lamentations_, ; ibid.,
    "Tragedy, Tradition, and Theology," 34--38; Linafelt, 3--9.

[^91]: See e.g. Tiffany Houck-Loomis, "Good God?!? Lamentations as a model for
    mourning the loss of the good God," _Journal Of Religion And Health_ 51, no.
    3 (September 1, 2012): 701--708.

[^92]: See e.g. the application to the Bosnian conflict in Lee, or the
    application to the Holocast in Linafelt.

[^93]: Rightly, Houck-Loumis, 702--703, though much of the rest of her analysis
    must be discarded.

[^94]: Lee, 3.

[^95]: Berlin, 19.


---


Works Cited
===========

  - Bier, Miriam. "'We have sinned and rebelled; you have not forgiven': the
    dialogic interaction between authoritative and internally persuasive
    discourse in Lamentations 3." _Biblical Interpretation_ 22, no. 2 (January
    1, 2014): 146-167. _ATLA Religion Database with ATLASerials_, EBSCO_host_
    (accessed April 18, 2015).

  - Berlin, Adele. _Lamentations: A Commentary_. The Old Testament Library.
    Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2002.

  - Dobbs-Allsopp, F. W. _Lamentations_. Interpretation. Louisville: John Knox
    Press, 2002.

  - –––. "The effects of enjambment in Lamentations. (part 2)." _Zeitschrift Für
    Die Alttestamentliche Wissenschaft_ 113, no. 3 (January 1, 2001): 370-385.
    _ATLA Religion Database with ATLASerials_, EBSCO_host_ (accessed April 14,
    2015).

  - –––. "The enjambing line in Lamentations: a taxonomy. (Part 1)."
    _Zeitschrift Für Die Alttestamentliche Wissenschaft_ 113, no. 2 (January 1,
    2001): 219-239. _ATLA Religion Database with ATLASerials_, EBSCO_host_
    (accessed April 14, 2015).

  - –––. "Tragedy, Tradition, and Theology in the Book of Lamentations."
    _Journal for the Study of the Old Testament_ no. 74 (June 1, 1997): 29-60.
    _ATLA Religion Database with ATLASerials_, EBSCO_host_ (accessed April 14,
    2015).

  - Gottwald, Norman K. _Studies in the Book of Lamentations_. Chicago: Alec R.
    Allenson, Inc., 1954.

  - Houck-Loomis, Tiffany. "Good God?!? Lamentations as a model for mourning the
    loss of the good God." _Journal of Religion and Health_ 51, no. 3 (September
    1, 2012): 701-708. _ATLA Religion Database with ATLASerials_, EBSCO_host_
    (accessed April 18, 2015).

  - House, Paul. "Lamentations." In _Song of Songs / Lamentations_. Vol. 23B of
    Word Biblical Commentary, edited by Bruce M. Metzger and John D. W. Watts.
    Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2004.

  - Huey, F. B. _Jeremiah, Lamentations_. Vol. 16 of The New American
    Commentary. Nashville: Broadman & Holman Publishers, 1993.

  - Lalleman, Hetty. _Jeremiah and Lamentations_. Tyndale Old Testament
    Commentaries. Downers Grove: InterVarsity Press, 2013.

  - Lee, Nancy C. _The Singers of Lamentations: Cities Under Siege, from Ur to
    Jerusalem to Sarajevo..._. Vol. 60 of Biblical Interpretation Series.
    Leiden: Brill, 2002.

  - Linafelt, Tod. _Suriving Lamentations: Catastrophe, Lament, and Protest in
    the Afterlife of a Biblical Book_. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press,
    2000\.

  - Longman, Tremper, III. _Jeremiah, Lamentations_. New International Biblical
    Commentary. Peabody: Hendrickson Publishers, 2008.

  - Provan, Iain. _Lamentations_. New Century Bible Commentary. Grand Rapids:
    William B. Eerdmans, 1991.

  - –––. "Past, present and future in Lamentations 3:52--66 : the case for a
    precative perfect re-examined." _Vetus Testamentum_ 41, no. 2 (April 1,
    1991): 164--175. _ATLA Religion Database with ATLASerials_, EBSCO_host_
    (accessed April 26, 2015).

  - Renkema, Johan. _Lamentations_. Translated by Brian Doyle. Historical
    Commentary on the Old Testament. Leuven: Peeters, 1998.

  - Thomas, Heath A. _Poetry and Theology in the Book of Lamentations: The
    Aesthetics of an Open Text_. Hebrew Bible Monographs, 47. Sheffield:
    Sheffield Pheonix Press, 2013.
