Author: Chris Krycho
Class: Baptist History and Identity
Professor: Dr. Nathan Finn
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Date: 2015-04-25 10:00
Category: theology
Tags: M. Div., SEBTS, papers
Title: An Uncomfortable Fit
Subtitle: A Complex, Post-Denominational Ecclesiastical Identity
Summary: A Complex, Post-Denominational Ecclesiastical Identity: or, how I'm still just a Presmatic Bapterian.
Template: formats/class

I grew up in a small, non-denominational, baptistic, charismatic church.
Speaking in tongues, the use of private prayer languages, claims to words of
knowledge and prophecies, and the expectation of miraculous healings were
common. Unfortunately, even granting a continuationist view of the gifts, the
church's practice was never in line with New Testament guidelines for the
gifts---no translation of tongues, for example, or requirement that prophecy be
fulfilled for the prophet to be judged true. I grew disillusioned with the
charismatic approach to the gifts by late high school, and spent several of the
following years as a near-cessationist. I remain skeptical of most charismatic
churches' practice of the gifts, but am not a cessationist: I see no compelling
exegetical argument for the position. I am especially open to the likelihood of
the miraculous gifts in frontier missions context, where they serve to validate
the proclamation of the gospel over and above demonic powers worshipped in
polytheistic, animistic, and shamanistic cultures.

In college, I spent two years attending a fairly traditional Southern Baptist
church. For the latter half of my time in college and the three years following,
I was a member of a non-demoninational, baptistic, broadly evangelical church
with my wife Jaimie. During that time, I remained baptistic, but began to become
concerned with the lack of confessional moorings in most baptistic churches
(denominational or non-denominational alike). Along the way, I shifted from the
non-Calvinistic views held by most charismatics and Baptists to an Edwardsian
Calvinism and developed stronger convictions about church polity. Finally, since
moving to North Carolina, we have been committed members at First Baptist Church
of Durham---a healthy, elder-led, Calvinistic Southern Baptist church that we
love.

However, even here, we find that we are not totally "at home"; it is not quite
right to call even Calvinistic Southern Baptists "my tradition". Indeed, it is
perhaps most accurate to say that I have not yet *found* my tradition. What I
have found instead are points to appreciate in a number of traditions, and an
increasing identification (at least from the outside) with many elements of the
Presbyterian tradition. A friend once described me as a "Pres-matic Bapt-erian",
and he seems to have been right. I find much to appreciate in the charismatic
background from which I sprang, and much to value in the Baptist tradition where
I currently live---but at the end of the day, it is only my credobaptist
convictions keeping me within the Baptist world, rather than transitioning into
Presbyterianism.

From the charismatic tradition in which I grew up, I learned the value of
affections oriented toward Christ. It is not enough to *understand* the things
of God; we must also love him and one another. Our faith must be true *and*
experiential. John reminds us that "this is eternal life, that they know you the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom you have sent" (John 17:3) and that
"Whoever says he is in the light and hates his brother is still in darkness" (1
John 2:9). Moreover, they emphasized that walking in the Holy Spirit is
essential to the healthy Christian life. Though I might now characterize the
Spirit's primary work differently from the church of my childhood, I still
affirm whole-heartedly that the Christian life is deeply and profoundly
dependent on the Holy Spirit. Paul enjoins us, "But I say, walk by the Spirit,
and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh.... If we live by the Spirit,
let us also keep in step with the Spirit" (Galatians 5:16, 25). Likewise, John
reports Jesus' shocking statement that it is *better* for us that he left and
sent the Spirit than that he should have remained with us (John 16:7ff.). The
life of the Christian must be a Spirit-filled and Spirit-empowered life. We can
never overemphasize the work of the Spirit in our lives (though we may sometimes
articulate that work inaccurately).

From the Southern Baptist churches I have attended I have gained a deeper
appreciation for the importance of evangelism and missions. Whether from the
Great Commission in Matthew 28:18--20 or the similar notes sounded in Luke
24:45--49 and then throughout the book of Acts, it is clear that God's people
are called to evangelize wherever we go. (Closely related to the above point,
however, this is not mere salesmanship. As Luke points out in Acts 1:8, the
power for the church's missionary work is the Holy Spirit, not human wisdom.) If
the church forgets that her first and foremost calling is the proclamation of
the gospel to all the nations, she will rapidly fall off the cart in one
direction or another.

The historic Baptist emphasis on regenerate church membership and the
congregation's responsibility for discipline are also essential ingredients to
healthy, flourishing churches (and therefore for flourishing individual
Christians). The countless "one another" passages of the New Testament (e.g.
John 13:34--35, Ephesians 4:25--32) emphasize mutual service as an essential
mark of Christian fellowship. Moreover, the well-known church discipline
passages (Matthew 18:15--20) indicate clearly that the members of a congregation
are to look out for each other's spiritual well-being. Although this care has
sometimes been twisted to abuse in other churches, we are blessed to participate
in a context where the passages' emphasis on forgiveness and restoration is kept
front and center. Meaningful membership and congregational care through church
discipline are not universally popular, but they are among the hallmarks of our
particular corner of the Southern Baptist convention. This kind of care for the
saints is not only necessary: it is *beautiful*.

From my Presbyterian friends I have increasingly come to appreciate a more
thoroughly confessional identity and the value of churches connected not only by
sharing funds but also by polity. Acts 15 highlights that the early church
resolved its most significant outstanding tension not by letting each church go
its own way doctrinally, but by issuing a decision that was binding on *all* the
churches. Granted: the presence of the apostles then means our situation is not
identical. Still, the event demands attention. Even a church with the
illustrious history and (apostolic!) leadership of the congregation at Antioch
did not feel equipped to make serious doctrinal decisions without consulting the
rest of the church. This is not to deny that there are clear marks of local
congregational responsibility throughout the epistles, only that the New
Testament pattern was of churches in active contact, cooperation, and doctrinal
dependence with each other in a way that appears *very* similar to a
proto-presbytery, and quite unlike the radical autonomy of Baptist churches.

I also find the historic Reformed articulation of the relationship between the
various spheres of life extremely compelling. Calvin and his heirs often
advocated clearly and coherently for the goodness of the created order and for
human activity therein. Here, vocation (including the arts) is taken not merely
as a means to gospel proclamation, but as genuinely good in itself. This theme
runs throughout Scripture: God commanded man to work before the Fall (cf.
Genesis 2:5,15), and though work has been corrupted and made toilsome by the
Fall, it remains good. The world itself was created good (Genesis 1), and though
it groans with us for redemption (Romans 8:19--23) it still proclaims the glory
of God (see Psalm 19 for just one of many examples). Many evangelicals pay lip
service to the goodness of creation and vocation, but few outside the high
church traditions (especially Anglican, Lutheran, and Presbyterian) carry the
doctrine through in their practice. This leaves me hungry for the kind of
intellectual, vocational, and artistic engagement I see in those traditions.

From late modern evangelicalism more broadly I have imbibed both my essential
Christian temperament---my unsettled, "post-denominational" eccesiastical
identity included!---and two other essential ingredients: a sense of
catholicity, and a desire to do more and better in caring for "the least of
these." Set against Jesus' "new command" in John 13, the divisions within the
church are painful realities we should strive to see undone wherever possible.
Our disagreements are not trivial; we cannot simply toss them aside. We can,
however, glory in our common experience of "mere Christianity" and take
opportunities where possible to worship our risen Lord together. We can also
work together across denominational boundaries to care for the orphans and
widows (James 1:27), to confront injustice in this age. The needs of the world
around us are severe and painful; the various wings of the church can and should
unite to bring what tastes we can of the justice and mercy of Christ's kingdom
into the present age---in the church, and everywhere else (Micah 6:8).

Finally, and perhaps most importantly, I have found in *all* of these movements
a consistent emphasis on the centrality, authority, and sufficiency of
Scripture. From my charismatic, Arminian-leaning youth minister to the pastors
of the middle-America Bible church I attended during and after college to the
elders of Calvinistic Baptist church we now call home, all have pointed
consistently to God's word as his ultimate self-revelation. These churches have
*all* lived out a commitment to the idea that God's word is living and active
(Hebrews 4:12) and profitable in every way (2 Timothy 3:16--17).

Perhaps unsurprisingly, given the number of shifts in my past, the transition to
another tradition would be relatively straightforward; apart from the issue of
believer's baptism, Presbyterianism looks quite appealing even now. Even beyond
these more important convictional differences, I do not fit comfortably within
the Baptistic tradition culturally. Its populism often verges on (and sometimes
crosses into) anti-intellectualism. Its broadly helpful focus on evangelism and
missions too often translates into a reductive approach that reduces all spheres
of life to vehicles for gospel-proclamation---not recognizing that while in
God's providence they often serve as such, the myriad spheres of life are good
in their own right. The Southern Baptist identification with the culture of the
South is also problematic for someone culturally not a Southerner.

Discussions on the nature of the church and the history of the Baptist movement
in this class have largely solidified my pre-existing discomfort within the
Baptist tradition and somewhat intensified the struggle to define my
ecclesiastical identity. The theological commitments and cultural habits of
(especially Southern) Baptists trouble me deeply. Reading _The Baptist Way_ had
precisely the opposite effect Norman intended: his polemical rhetoric bore the
marks of profound ignorance of other traditions. Much of the reading on
believers' baptism was similarly dismissive---arguing not against the substance
of other positions, but instead against caricatures thereof. Dockery's call for
renewal and consensus was more helpful, but it, too, had a sectarian bent. The
denomination's (and the broader tradition's) deep anti-intellectualism and
lasting suspicion of creeds and confessions make it unlikely that Southern
Baptists will be able to claim the confessional identity or theological
consensus they need.

It is an unfortunate reality that my experience of Baptists has too often been
marked by denominational sectarianism,  anti-intellectualism and
anti-creedalism, and reductionistic and utilitarian approaches to God's world.
To be sure, there are exceptions to these trends, and I am grateful for them.
But it means that, credobaptist though I am, "Baptist" and especially "Southern
Baptist" are not and cannot be my ecclesiastical *identity* unless they comes to
mean something very different than they have for many years. In the meantime, I
will remain a "Pres-matic Bap-terian", and deeply grateful for the traditions
that have shaped me and especially our current church---even when they are not a
"perfect fit".
