Title: The Joy of Good Tools
Subtitle: Or: How deciding to pay for GitHub made me think about delight.
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2015-01-09 18:00
Summary: I started out with a post on being willing to pay for GitHub. I ended up with a meditation on vocation and delight. It's quite the journey!
Slug: joy-good-tools
Tags: software development, design, joy

<i class="editorial">Note: This started out as a [series of posts on App.net],
but as I realized that it was growing a bit, I decided to [take my own advice]
and turn it into a short blog post. (The first four paragraphs of this post are
the same as the posts that spawned it.) And then, as so often happens with my
writing, it rather took on a life of its own. So much for short.</i>

[series of posts on App.net]: https://alpha.app.net/chriskrycho/post/47820144
[take my own advice]: /2014/a-few-theses-on-blogging.html

---

After wrestling with Bitbucket issues again all day, I think I’ve finally hit
the breaking point. Time to go ahead and drop the money on GitHub and migrate my
private repos there. (Yes, GitLab is neat, but tool integrations matter, too.)

I think I’m also probably going to spring for a small subscription to Pivotal
Tracker. It’s cheaper to do GitHub+PivotalTracker at my scale than to host
GitLab and run YouTrack on a VPS. And that’s *not* counting my time.

The big thing with Pivotal is that I *need* the ability to estimate more
effectively even than something like Trello affords (and I don’t want to spend
time wrangling with Chrome plugins), and it gives me that. Totally worth the
cost in saved pain.

And as for GitHub as compared to the free GitLab… well, honestly, the
F/OSS-copycat model bothers me on a lot of levels. The fact that their strategy
is “copy GitHub as closely as possible, and charge for it” is not my idea of
"winning slowly".

("Winning slowly" is more than just the name of my [podcast]. In fact, it's the
opposite: we named the podcast that because it's one of the core commitments in
our lives.)

[podcast]: //www.winningslowly.org

So I'm going to pay for Pivotal and GitHub. My time is worth something, and the
quality of the tools I use matters, too. Ongoing irritation and frustration adds
up over time. Good tools can make us happier. Bad tools can make work more
frustrating than it needs to be. Given just how frustrating work can be anyway,
the last thing in the world I want to do is unnecessarily spend my time being
even more frustrated by my tools. And you know what? $7/month for each of those
tools is absolutely worth more than the frustration of wrestling with tools that
do the job less well.

I'm actually really excited by this. Pivotal Tracker will help me avoid making
the painful mistake of underestimation in the future, by helping me see how long
things actually take and giving me a way to plan out major projects with that
data immediately available. GitHub will be simultaenously more functional and
much lovelier than Bitbucket---no strategy tax holding it back!---and will be
much nicer to use.

At the end of the day, it comes down to this: I'm happy to pay for good tools
that make my work more enjoyable.

---

To my surprise and amusement, this leads me to a closely related point I had
been writing up in a separate blog post: the value of tools that *delight*. It
is not merely that bad tools make work unpleasant. Good tools can make work a
*joy*. Indeed, because my vocations is such a significant part of my life, few
things bring me as much simple pleasure as a tool that does its job well, is
pleasant to use, and is beautiful, all at once.

The latest example of this for me is [Bee], a tool designed to make working with
issue trackers like JIRA, GitHub Issues, and FogBugz easier and more pleasant. I
use JIRA for one of my long-term contracts---I actually set it up for the
company---and I have a love-hate relationship with it. JIRA's power is great,
but the web interface is slow and cluttered.[^atlassian]

[Bee]: //www.neat.io/bee/index.html

I have used other desktop tools with JIRA before, and they were even worse than
the web interface. I stumbled across Bee the other day (I cannot even remember
how!), decided to try it out, and fell in love. It is simple, fast, and
*elegant*. That is a killer combination. I have been using it daily for over a
week, and strange though it might be to say of a desktop client for issue
trackers, I get genuine pleasure out of using it. (Yes, I know: that is a bit
strange.)

I have the same experience with a number of other tools I use---[Tower],
[Byword], and [IntelliJ IDEA] to name just a few. This very post is written in
Byword, and I'm *happy* about it. I wish I felt that way about every tool I use.

[Tower]://www.git-tower.com 
[Byword]: //bywordapp.com 
[IntelliJ IDEA]: //www.jetbrains.com/idea/

And this goes beyond software. I have had the same experience driving a car. The
Mazda3 I drove in and after college was a delight. The MUV[^muv] we drive right
now is sufficient. The Chevy Malibu we rented for driving to and from Texas in
December was *irritating*, with an inordinate number of small failures to
consider how the thing would actually be used. I would buy another Mazda3 in a
heartbeat; I would contentedly take another Lexus RX300-alike; I would avoid a
Chevy Malibu like the plague.

*Every* category of tool is like this.

The difference between a poor or mediocre tool and a good tool can make the
difference between frustration and satisfaction. The difference between a good
tool and a *great* tool can make the difference between satisfaction and
delight. That inspires me: it makes me want to make things so that they do more
than *suffice*---so that they *excel*, so that they delight and energize their
audience. Whether that is someone using a web application I write or someone
listening to a piece of music I composed, I want them to experience more than
good-enough. I want them to feel joy.

---

There is something profound here, I think, something that goes even deeper than
just the experience of being happy enough with a good tool to pay money to use
it. I think human beings are meant for that profound joy---meant for it in every
breath. That these kinds of delights are rare, and so often marred even at their
best by little failures, is a mark of the imperfection---and, in human terms at
least, the *imperfectibility*---of the world in which we live.  But the fact
that such moments will be rare until the eschaton neither undoes nor diminishes
the imperative to strive after them---especially for those of us who, as
Christians, affirm the goodness and the _telos_ of the created world. Quite the
contrary. We have a responsibility and a charge as subcreators always to be able
to say of the work we have done, "It is good."

I am not there yet. I hope very much, though, that the work I do this year will
be---for at least one person---a little sip from that deep well of delight.
Whether I succeed or no, at least the bar is set where it ought to be.

[^atlassian]: Atlassian's designers seem to be shooting for the kind of "flat"
    minimalism that is in right now... and missing the mark entirely. *All* of
    their tools are a cluttered mess in the UI/X department.

[^muv]: A "Mom Utility Vehicle", my wry term for "SUV"-type vehicles sitting on 
    standard car chasses.