---
Title: Power and Mercy
Date: 2015-12-09 12:30
Author: Chris Krycho
Category: theology
Tags: SEBTS, M. Div., sermons
Template: formats/class
Class: Bible Exposition I
Professor: Dr. Jim Shaddix
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Summary: >
    Mark 5:1â€“20 shows us that Jesus is the kind of king we need: one who is both
    powerful and merciful.
---

<i class="editorial">The Bible exposition class for which I prepared this sermon
involves <em>writing</em> but not <em>delivering</em> a sermon. If, at some
point in the future, I actually deliver this sermon (e.g. in my sermon delivery
course next semester), I will update this post with a link to the audio and/or
video.</i>

Introduction
------------

Recent estimates suggest that the United States of America currently spends
about three times as much money on our military as the next biggest military
spender out there, China. In fact, if you add up the military spending of China,
Russia, Saudi Arabia, France, Great Britain, India, and Germany, we still spend
more. And remember, China's and India's populations are both over four times
larger than ours. What's more, corruption and graft notwithstanding, our
military-industrial complex is incredibly advanced. It's fair to say that
America has the most powerful, best equipped, most effective military apparatus
in the whole world.

And yet. And yet, as a country, we are very afraid. All of that power can't
protect us from everything. And we are very feared. For all of America's lofty
ideals, we have made a mess of things pretty often. We've gotten it wrong.
Having power, it turns out, isn't enough. Having enough power matters, but so
does having the right kind of power, and so does how you use that power.

As we look at Mark 5:1--20, we're going to see that play out. It's not just
having power that matters. It matters who has the power, and how they use it. Do
they torment? Or do they show mercy?

I'll give you a hint: we want power coupled with mercy. You can see, if you look
at verse 19, how this whole passage hinges on that. When all is said and done,
the man in the middle of this story gets to go tell all his friends and
neighbors how much the Lord had done for him---how powerful God is---and how the
Lord had shown him mercy.


Exposition
----------

### Context

So let's see how Mark gets us there. As we come to our text, we read: "They came
to the other side of the sea, to the country of the Gerasenes."

"The other side of the sea from what?" you might be asking. Well, from Galilee,
where Jesus had been teaching. Back at the beginning of chapter 4, Mark tells us
about a series of parables that Jesus taught about his new kingdom. And those
parables particularly emphasized people's response as his kingdom comes. Some
reject it entirely; some look excited about it at first, but ultimately aren't a
part of it; and some, a few, *really are* citizens of the new kingdom.

Then, back in 4:35, Mark switched to a series of narratives---four stories. This
is Mark's basic strategy: tell us what Jesus said, and then show us what he did.
Why? Well, because the parables weren't just cryptic things Jesus said to
confuse people; he was telling his disciples, the ones who had ears to hear, how
things really were. Each thing Jesus *did* showed that what he *said* was true.

His kingdom wasn't coming the way people thought, or even to the people who
thought it was for them. And he wasn't the kind of king they had in mind,
either. He had authority not just over nations and troops, but (as Mark shows us
in these four stories), over the sea and the sky, over demons---that's today's
passage---over incurable illness, even over death. And in each of these events,
we see that Jesus wasn't just a *powerful* king. He was also a *merciful* king.

Now, within these four narratives, Mark breaks things down into two pairs of
miracle stories which hang together: the storm and the demonized man, and the
two healings back on the other side of the sea. Today, we find ourselves in the
second half of that first pair. With the storm, the disciples could not save
themselves, so Jesus rebuked the storm, and there was a great calm, and the
disciples were afraid. We are going to see those same ideas here: someone who
cannot save himself, Jesus rebuking something, a great calm as a result, and
people being afraid. We will see Jesus' power and mercy. And we will see a
different response than fear---a better one.


### Beat 1: A wild man -- 5:1--6

So let's follow Mark on this journey. Verse 2 tells us that "when Jesus had
stepped out of the boat, immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with
an unclean spirit". Verse 6 reiterates the point---"And when he saw Jesus from
afar, he ran and fell down before him"---but first Mark wants us to know
something about who this man was. Verses 3 through 5 tell us:

> He lived among the tombs. And no one could bind him anymore, not even with a
> chain, for he had often been bound with shackles and chains, but he wrenched
> the chains apart, and he broke the shackles in pieces. No one had the strength
> to subdue him. Night and day among the tombs and on the mountains he was
> always crying out and cutting himself with stones.

In other words, this was not a man in need of a little help, an appointment with
a counselor. No, here we have a man enslaved. Nothing anyone could do would help
him.

What we have here is Mark establishing both the characters involved, and the
"power curve" for the rest of the scene. If you're reading a superhero comic or
watching a superhero movie, you have a sense of how strong everyone is. And of
course, this leads to all sorts of conundrums. Who would win in a fight? Next
year's _Batman vs. Superman: Dawn of Justice_ and _Captain America: Civil War_
both hinge on this. Who is stronger? Who will win? And of course, if you let the
wrong characters in, the game just becomes pointless. I saw an interview with
the writers behind _Captain America_, where they explained why the Hulk wouldn't
be in the movie. You add in the Hulk, and it's game over for the other team.
There's no tension in the conflict anymore. The Hulk just wins.

And that's basically the picture Mark shows us in this passage. It's pretty
clear: the demons were stronger. Nothing anyone could do was effective. They
couldn't even keep this man imprisoned; verse 4 has him acting like, well, like
the Hulk. They tried chaining him up hand and foot; he just ripped the chains on
his wrists off and smashed the fetters on his feet. "No one," Mark says, "had
the strength to subdue him." Healing him was out of the question. And the man
himself was clearly totally under the demons' control. The "super-villains" had
the upper hand.

Now, the Hulk can be kind of fun to watch, but that's not what we have here.
They made a mockery of this man. We shouldn't take that lightly. They made him
run around screaming, naked, cutting himself, in the midst of the tombs. There
is a reason Mark describes him as having an *unclean* spirit. The demons were
doing everything in their power---short of killing this man---to defile what God
had called "very good" and what he had promised to redeem: his humanity.

So there's the power curve when Jesus arrives on the scene; there are the
characters. As soon as Jesus gets off the boat, this man comes out to meet him.
And then, perhaps surprisingly, given that power curve---but then again, maybe
not *so* surprising given what Jesus has already done in this gospel---verse 6
tells us that the man falls down at his knees before Jesus. He goes prostrate.
Flat on his face. The way you would kneel before someone absolutely more
powerful than you. Jesus' arrival is clearly a change from the status quo.

### Beat 2: A merciful act -- 5:7--13

#### Setup

So Mark has set the scene for us: here is a man who has been tormented for who
knows how long, and as soon Jesus steps off the boat, he man comes running up
and throws himself down at Jesus' feet. That's quite the welcoming party. Put
yourself in the disciples' shoes for a moment. You've just seen Jesus go from
sleeping in the back of a boat---in the middle of the kind of storm that scared
the Galilean fishermen who are with you---to standing up and telling a storm to
be quiet and it does. You're afraid. And then you get to the other side, still
more than a little in shock from that, and a naked man with cuts all over his
body comes up to Jesus and throws himself at his feet and starts arguing with
him, shouting at him. You might be afraid all over again. And for good reason.
Notice that throughout the whole passage, the disciples are just onlookers. This
is out of their league, too; so they just watch.

#### Beat 2a: Jesus' power -- 5:7--10

Dealing with the man and his impure spirit is not, however, out of Jesus'
league. Verses 7--10 make it very clear that Jesus is absolutely and
unquestionably the most powerful person in this encounter.

Notice, too, that the demonized man is arguing with Jesus because Jesus is
arguing with him. Verses 7 and 8 tell us:

> He shouted at the top of his voice, "What do you want with me, Jesus, Son of
> the Most High God? In God's name don't torture me!" For Jesus had said to him,
> "Come out of this man, you impure spirit!"

Jesus picked this fight, and it's not going to go down well for the demons.

Now we know from ancient records that there were both Greek and Jewish exorcists
who made it their business to drive out evil spirits. You will find the same in
many non-Western cultures today, and---as an aside---I think those cultures
probably have the right of it more than we do. It has been said that the
greatest trick the devil ever pulled was convincing people he didn't exist, and
that seems about right. How can you possibly fight something you don't even
believe exists? It's a brilliant, devious strategic move. You can pull the North
Korea strategy---try to constantly rattle your saber to keep everyone afraid of
you. Or you can act like an assassin: keep a low profile, and if possible don't
even let your would-be opponents know you exist, until you've killed them and
caused mayhem. In the hyper-secular West, that seems to be the satanic strategy
of the hour, and I think it's fair to say it's been reasonably successful for
our enemy---even if we know from passages like this one that Jesus' ultimate
victory is guaranteed.

That *wasn't* the strategy of the day back then, though. And we know from those
old records that the general strategy for dealing with demons was to try to use
powerful command words and phrases, or to negotiate and bargain, or to use the
demon's name to get spiritual power over them, or to try to use other divine
powers to bind them.

But we don't see any of that in this passage. The demons recognize Jesus' power
and authority right away. You can see it there in verse 7: as soon as Jesus
tells them to leave, they plead with him not to torment them. And you don't
plead with someone not to torment you unless they *can* torment you. By the time
Jesus asks for a name in verse 9, the demons have already acknowledged Jesus'
power and authority in the situation. What's more, they call him "Son of the
Most High God" there in verse 7. Now, this title does double duty here.

First, it is another confirmation of Mark's claim throughout his gospel: that
Jesus is in fact the Son of God. And significantly, the early confessions to
that effect all come on the lips of demons he exorcises. The spiritual forces
know spiritual authority when they see it, even if the people don't see it yet.
So confirming that Jesus is "the Son of God" is the first thing this does.

The second thing it does is establish that Jesus isn't just another player in
the spiritual game. Whatever other gods someone might worship, and whatever
other claims to divine power someone might offer up, Jesus trumps them all. He
is the son not just of *some* god, but of *the Most High God*.

The fact that there is a legion of demons, as they admit in verse 9, simply
heightens the contrast. We knew already that the "impure spirit" was able to
torment the man; now we know that it is *many* demons. It doesn't matter.
They're still reduced to begging and pleading with him: verse 10 tells us that
the man---really, the spirits speaking through him---"begged Jesus again and
again not to send them out of the area."

Again, the power curve: Jesus' authority isn't even in the same ballpark as
anyone else in the story---not the demonized man, not the people who were unable
to help him or even restrain him, not the silent disciples, and not even the
multitude of demons. He exceeds them all.

#### Beat 2b: Jesus' focus -- 5:11--13

Jesus' power is only part of the story, though. As we come into vv. 11--13, we
can see his *focus* as well. And that focus is healing a man in need. Read with
me, starting in verse 11:

> A large herd of pigs was feeding on the nearby hillside. The demons begged
> Jesus, "Send us among the pigs; allow us to go into them." He gave them
> permission, and the impure spirits came out and went into the pigs. The herd,
> about two thousand in number, rushed down the steep bank into the lake and
> were drowned.

First, this confirms what we already know: they *need* Jesus' permission. He is
in charge. But, second, it also tells us that between the man and the pigs,
there wasn't a contest for Jesus. Not because he didn't care about pigs. We know
from Colossians 1 that the eternal Son of God---who Mark is taking this whole
book to tell us about---is the agent of God's creation of the whole universe;
and his powerful word is the reason that the whole universe keeps existing, pigs
included. Pigs were part of what he called a "good" creation in Genesis 1.
Speaking as a lover of bacon myself, I'm inclined to agree with God's
assessment: pigs are good.

But, and this is important: people are more important than pigs. You can find
any number of modern commentators on this passage asking about the ethical
implications of Jesus' letting the demons destroy the pigs along with themselves
in this way. Neither Mark nor Luke or Matthew seem bothered by this point.
Neither does Jesus. Pigs matter. Pigs are good. But they don't matter like
people do. And while it is not clear from this passage why Jesus accepted the
demons' request, what is clear is that his mercy toward this man---his
compassion on him---trumped any concern for the pigs. Jesus' focus was healing
and saving people. Here, we see clearly that his powerful word is not just for
creation, but also for *salvation*.

This tells us something about Jesus' power and authority. It is *good* power and
authority. He is *merciful*. And it is so important---*extraordinarily*
important---that the Son of the Most High God, the king bringing in his kingdom,
be merciful. Because as Ephesians 2 tells us, before God intervenes in our
lives, we're all like this man was. We start off dead in our sins, slaves to our
lusts and every desire gone wrong and totally unchecked, in the domain of
darkness, following the prince of the power of the air, the spirit now at work
in the children of disobedience. The demons, in other words. And then Jesus
steps in. As the rightful king, he has the power to free us... and he's a
*merciful* king, so he *does* free us. That's good news. That's gospel.

### Beat 3: A fearful crowd -- 5:14--17

Of course, it doesn't always *look* like good news to everyone when Jesus shows
up and starts healing people. Remember, Mark is showing us the truth of those
parables from back in chapter 4. So we see here the good king who is bringing in
his kingdom---in secret now, but someday in glorious light---but we also see
those different kinds of soil from the parable of the sower and the seed: some
fruitful, some *not* fruitful.

Look at what happens in verses 14 through 17:

> Those tending the pigs ran off and reported this in the town and countryside,
> and the people went out to see what had happened. When they came to Jesus,
> they saw the man who had been possessed by the legion of demons, sitting
> there, dressed and in his right mind; and they were afraid. Those who had seen
> it told the people what had happened to the demon-possessed man---and told
> about the pigs as well. Then the people began to plead with Jesus to leave
> their region.

I can imagine being one of the herdsmen, seeing the pigs drowned by demons, and
being frightened---and maybe they were. But that's not what Mark says. That's
not why these people were afraid. They were afraid because they saw this man who
had been naked, clothed; who had been running and screaming, sitting calmly; who
had been out of his mind, now in his right mind. *That* was what made them
afraid.

Mark has created a sharp contrast here: between this scene and the one that
preceded it, the calming of the storm.

  - In both scenes, we see Jesus confronting something far more powerful than
    ordinary humans can handle: in the first, a terrible storm; in the second, a
    legion of demons.
  - In both scenes, we see him exercise his powerful word for mercy: in the
    first, to save his disciples from the storm; in the second, to save this man
    from the demons who tormented him.
  - In both scenes, we see the tumult of a broken world, and then calm and peace
    after Jesus acts.
  - And in both scenes, we see people who are afraid after Jesus acts.

But there seems to be more than one way to be "afraid" when you see the power of
God's Spirit on display in the person of Jesus Christ. You can be afraid and
still want to be with him, like the disciples. Or you can be afraid like these
people were---they wanted him to leave.

Clearly, one of these is better than the other. Far better to be with Jesus even
if his power is more than you can handle---even if you find that the Son of God
is not at all safe. Because he *is* good.

### Beat 4: An effective commission -- 5:18--20

But Mark wants to take us even further than the disciples' example. He wants us
to see that we do not need to be afraid. Because Jesus' *power* is expressed in
*mercy* to his people. The disciples didn't really understand who Jesus was yet,
didn't really grasp either his power or his mercy yet, but someone surprising in
this story does: an unclean Gentile man who had been tortured by demons. The man
Jesus healed. The one to whom he so very powerfully showed mercy. Look! Verse
18:

> As Jesus was getting into the boat, the man who had been demon-possessed
> begged to go with him.

He begged! He is the third person to beg or plead in this story. The demons
begged not to be destroyed yet---and Jesus surprisingly showed them mercy in
that. The people pleaded with Jesus to leave---and Jesus surprisingly showed
them mercy in that. And here---at last!---someone begs for the *right* thing: to
be with Jesus. The same phrase as when Jesus called the disciples to be with
him. And Jesus surprisingly... shows mercy by saying *no* to him. Verses 19 and
20:

> Jesus did not let him, but said, "Go home to your own people and tell them how
> much the Lord has done for you, and how he has had mercy on you." So the man
> went away and began to tell in the Decapolis how much Jesus had done for him.
> And all the people were amazed.

"Go home to your own people", verse 19 says---some translations say "to your
friends"---"and tell them how much the Lord has done for you, and how he has
mercy on you." Precisely *because* this man understood Jesus great power and his
great mercy, he had somewhere to be that wasn't *with Jesus* yet. He knew how
great God's power was, and he knew how deep God's mercy was. So Jesus gave him a
commission, and it looks familiar: go tell the nations what God has done. The
nations: this is a Gentile, not a Jew; he is in the Decapolis, Gentile country,
not Jewish country. "Go tell them about God's mercy," Jesus says to him. Because
the mercy of God is not just for the Jews. Jesus was not going to be a petty
little messiah, king of a corner of Palestine. God's mercy was for the healing
of the nations. And here we see the first taste of that in Mark---because what
happened? "...all the people were amazed."

Mark doesn't tell us here what came of this, what the fruit was. We don't know
how many of those who were amazed were just apparently fruitful soil, where the
seed sprung up and soon withered. But it is clear that there was at least *one*
who was good soil. And if Jesus' ministry in the Decapolis in chapter 7 is any
indication, it seems the Spirit may well have been using this man's seed-sowing
to prepare a great harvest some day.

One more thing to see here: a detail, but not a little thing. Unlike the
disciples, who hadn't *gotten it* yet---this man proclaimed *exactly* what he
should have. Notice, Jesus tells him to say what "the Lord" had done for him.
From a Jew, including Jesus, that meant "Yahweh," the God of Israel. And in
verse 20, "the man went away and began to tell... how much *Jesus* had done for
him." And rightly so. The mercy of Yahweh, the God of Israel, is the mercy of
Jesus, the Son of the *Most High God*---the God over every pagan deity, over
every demonic power, over every human heart, over *all* nations.


Summation
---------

A few years ago, John Piper was preaching a missions sermon, and he started with
Mark 5:19. You can see why. It's the heart of the gospel. And Piper summed up
the heart of the gospel this way:

> God sent his Son into the world to save sinners from every nation so that they
> would glorify him for his mercy.

And that's right. This whole narrative is a microcosm, a little picture, of the
gospel, and of the right response to the gospel. Here we have a story of a
Gentile man---one of the nations, not a Jew---who was literally enslaved by the
powers of hell, set free by Jesus. But not just set free; set free and given a
commission. Look there at verse 19 again: "Go home to your friends and tell them
how much the Lord has done for you, and how he has had mercy on you." That
commission tells us what this story is about. And the center of that commission
is the center of Mark's gospel. And in fact, it's the center of the whole Bible.
It's the center of this *great* story we are all part of. God's power, expressed
in mercy, to save people from every nation through Jesus Christ.

Look how much he has done for us *because of that mercy*! He saves people like
you and me, people from every nation who can't save themselves, and he invites
them into his kingdom, and he gives them a mission.


Invitation
----------

Which is to say, he gives *us* a mission. If you are a Christian in this
room---if you have said to Jesus, "Let me be with you"---then he has said to
you, "Go and tell your friends how much the Lord has done for you and how he has
shown mercy to you." Every one of us should want others to know how God has
saved us. If you aren't doing that, I challenge you: tell the people around you!
Tell your friends, your coworkers, your family members. If that's hard for
you---and I understand; it can be---then think back on your salvation. Think
about how God has shown mercy to you. Pray for the Spirit to stir you up, to
deepen your love for him and your joy in what he has done, so that your telling
others isn't out of guilt, but out of excitement. That's a prayer he delights to
answer.

And friend, if you are in this room and you are *not* in the kingdom? We have a
good king, who offers you a pardon for your rebellion. You can be a citizen with
us; we were all rebels, too. Come to him. Ask to be with him. Join us as we
follow him. He has shown us mercy; he will show you mercy, too. All you have to
do is surrender. Lay down your weapons. Ask for mercy. And call him Lord. If
that's you, please: let us walk with you. Come talk with us before you leave.

Let's pray. Let's pray to our powerful, merciful God.
