---
Title: <cite>Spirit Empowered Preaching</cite>
Date: 2015-09-08 12:05
Author: Chris Krycho
Template: formats/class
Class: Biblical Exposition I
Professor: Dr. Jim Shaddix
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Category: Theology
Tags: M. Div., SEBTS, papers, book reviews
...

Arturo G. Azurdia III spent several decades preaching and pastoring. He was thus
well-experienced in the week-to-week work of preparing sermons and the burden of
caring for a congregation. During his years of pastoral work, however, he also
studied at Westminster Theological Seminary; he was at the time of the book's
publication a professor at Western Seminary. Thus, he also brought to the table
academic knowledge helpful for situating his developing understanding of the
role of the Holy Spirit in a preaching ministry. Accordingly, Azurdia brings
both Scripture and experience to bear in *Spirit Empowered Preaching*: the
lessons he learned in seminary, he then applied in the context of his ongoing
ministry, and was able to filter his experience through careful reflection on
the Scriptures. *Spirit Empowered Preaching* was published not at the beginning
of that career, but after considerable time behind the pulpit of an ordinary
church, after he had moved into a teaching role.

Azurdia's aim in *Spirit Empowered Preaching* is twofold: to demonstrate the
necessity of the Holy Spirit's work in the preacher for effective preaching, and
to describe how the preacher should go about seeking the Spirit's work in his
preaching. He argues in his introduction that "the greatest deficiency in
contemporary expositional ministry is powerlessness; in other words, preaching
that is devoid of the vitality of the Holy Spirit" (12). That is, although right
preaching necessarily entails careful exegesis and attention to the "literal,
grammatical, historical, contextual, redemptive" details of a text (11), no
amount of mere intellectual study on its own will accomplish God's purposes for
preaching. If the church is to be encouraged, challenged, and built up; and if
outsiders are to be convicted, the Holy Spirit must be present and working
efficaciously through the preacher. Only the Spirit can change human hearts.
This was true for the early church, and it is true today.

Azurdia lays out his thesis in a brief introduction. Following that, he does not
simply repeat the thesis chapter by chapter, however. Instead, he builds a
broader theology of preaching and connects the different elements of the
preaching ministry back to the central theme of the text. Thus, in Chapter 1, he
starts by arguing that the "greater works" the disciples would do were the
advancement of the gospel through the nations, and notes how Christ explicitly
tied this to the coming of the promised Holy Spirit. The advance of the gospel
was for the disciples, and is for modern preachers, utterly dependent on the
work of God. Chapter 2 describes who the Spirit is and what he does in the life
of the minister---and what goes wrong in the ministry when the Spirit is
neglected. In Chapter 3, Azurdia argues for Christocentric preaching, since the
Spirit is *Christ's* Spirit and glorifies him. Chapter 4 carries this theme
further: the priority of every preacher must be glorifying Christ, not merely
meeting the felt needs of the people. Every topic must be heard in light of the
finished work of the Savior, not standing on its own as abstract ethical
instruction. In Chapter 5, he argues that the first responsibility of both the
minister and the church is preaching---and that, as such, the church should
understand when the pastor spends most of his time preparing for sermon
delivery, rather than on other concerns. Here he also takes time to critique
ministry methodologies which do not align with the gospel, especially those in
many seeker-sensitive churches which have run to extremes of entertainment.

In Chapter 6, Azurdia comes to the core of his message: the preacher must be
both generally filled with the Spirit (i.e. regenerate) and specifically filled
time and again by the Spirit for preaching. Here he draws upon the frequent
language of being "filled with the Holy Spirit" in Acts as well as the
affirmations of preachers like Martyn Lloyd Jones. Chapter 7 is an examination
of the flip-side of the necessity of the Spirit's filling: the frustration of
the pastor's own inability. If the work of the Spirit is utterly essential for
preaching to have any effect whatsoever, then all the pastor's efforts may be
for naught. This may lead to either despair (for the self-dependent man) or
greater faith (for the man who trusts Christ).

In Chapter 8, Azurdia turns to the nature and life of a man called to this
ministry: he "*must devote himself to a consistent pattern of fervent
intercession*" (135, emphasis original). That the Spirit must be present for
preaching to be effective is not grounds for pastors to abdicate their own
responsibility. Rather, it increases their responsibility to pray for the Spirit
to work through their preaching. Chapter 9 continues this focus on the life of
the preacher. He must be prayerful, diligent in study, and prayerful in his
study. He must remember in all this prayer that the Spirit is not a *tool* but a
*person*, someone who can be grieved. The preacher must keep himself holy, and
so must his congregation---because either may drive away the Spirit by their
unrepentance. Chapter 10 illustrates and emphasizes this necessity of prayer in
the life of both preacher and congregation. Finally, Azurdia briefly summarizes
his argument: "*Spirit empowered preaching is the principle means of advancing
the kingdom of God.... will be evangelical in emphasis.... is the responsibility
of the church*" (179--181, emphasis original).

The book is persuasive and thorough, but neither as effective or as persuasive
as it might have been. Azurdia's comments on the "greater ministry" the
disciples were to have are perhaps the most helpful material in the book. In
general, his attention to the roles the Spirit plays in the life of the church
is a helpful corrective both to the neglect the Spirit often receives from
non-charismatic churches and the misinterpretations proffered by many in the
charismatic movement. Likewise, his call to prayerful as well as well-studied
preaching is a helpful reminder especially for preachers tempted to rely on
their own intellectual merits. Gladly, and unlike E. M. Bounds' work on prayer,
he does so without ever denigrating the value of intellectual engagement and
deep study. Azurdia's counsel to study hard, pray hard, and pray during the time
of study is well-taken. Those who preach should devote meaningful parts of their
preparation time not only to exegesis but to fellowship with God by *prayerful*
interaction with the text.

Perhaps the greatest strength of the book is Azurdia's emphasis on the nature
and person of the Spirit. As noted above, he refuses to indulge in the mistaken
charismatic emphases on the miraculous gifts over the more central work of the
Spirit: revealing Christ. All the focus on sign gifts can quickly lead people to
forget that the Spirit was sent to make Christ known and glorify him. His
diagnostic question is extremely helpful (and not only for evaluating
charismatics, but for evaluating anyone claiming God's hand on his ministry):
"*Does this ministry reveal and glorify Jesus Christ?*" (50, emphasis original).
Again, the Spirit is the spirit of truth, sent by the Father to empower the
church to know and make known the Son. As such, no ministry which claims the
Spirit's power but focuses on anything other than knowing and proclaiming Christ
is legitimate. At the same time, this does not mean the church should shun the
Spirit to avoid those missteps---rather, the church should point to a better
understanding of the Spirit's mission, and respond in faith. A church that
understands the Spirit's proclamatory and instructing role will follow Azurdia's
counsel and dedicate itself to prayer, cognizant that apart from the Spirit the
church and her pastor can do nothing. Congregations should also learn to ask
that same question of *all* sermons and preachers and experiences: does it
reveal and glorify Jesus Christ?

However, weaknesses emerge in a number of areas which substantially lessen the
book's impact. First, Azurdia makes the same move many Reformed and evangelical
preachers do, elevating the preaching of the word to the primary (and nearly the
sole) responsibility of the preacher. This move seems unwarranted in light of
the distinction between ordinary pastors and the apostles on whose actions (in
Acts 6) the view is grounded. As such, Azurdia simply passed over the many other
responsibilities enjoined of shepherds in the pastoral epistles. To be sure,
preaching is a necessity in the life of the church. However, it is only one of
the pastor's responsibilities, and he will find it difficult to carry it out
effectively if he is not sharing life with his sheep. Thus, pastors ought to
dedicate much of their time to *shepherding*: to caring for the ordinary soulish
needs of their people and not only for the times of preaching. This is
doctrinally necessary, and practically helpful.

More problematic was Azurdia's conflation of the Spirit's filling with an
experience or sense of that filling. Like Lloyd-Jones and others he cites,
Azurdia describes the anointing or unction of the Spirit as a particular sense
the preacher and congregation have of the Spirit's working through him in a
unique way. Curiously, Azurdia also affirms that there may be times the Spirit
is moving powerfully but the preacher is unaware of it, as in the common case of
a man who preached and felt it accomplished nothing but heard later from members
of his congregation how the Spirit used it in their lives. Too often in
evangelicalism, *feeling* is mistaken for *reality*. Nowhere in the New
Testament is the Spirit's presence described in terms of a feeling in the
preacher. Rather, it is born out by the effects of the preaching. To be sure,
the Spirit may graciously grant the pastor a clear sense of his presence and
power on some days, and that sense is a blessing. However, the absence of such a
sense does not indicate the Spirit's absence; neither does a strong feeling
necessarily indicate his presence in power. In encouraging pastors to think in
these terms, Azurdia ultimately plants seeds of discouragement in the lives of
those who may preach diligently and prayerfully---and effectively---for many
years without that particular experience, which is promised no one. As he notes
of many experiences in charismatic circles, "we need to be concerned that the
spiritual development of well-meaning Christians can become vulnerable to the
law of diminishing returns... Often, the inevitable consequence is spiritual
emptiness" (49). This is no less a danger for the preacher expecting a strong
internal sense of anointing than for the believer wanting a fresh anointing for
speaking in tongues. Preachers should indeed dedicate themselves to prayer and
come with an expectation that they can accomplish nothing on their own, but they
should reject as unbiblical and unhelpful the idea that their internal sense of
the Spirit's presence is accurate or indicative of his work.

Still, on the whole, Azurdia's point is well-taken. The church desperately needs
the Holy Spirit for her efficacy in ministry. Lives will not change unless God
works: sermons will fall on deaf ears, and congregations' ministries may produce
physically helpful outcomes while leaving sinners damned. Preachers and their
people must recover prayerful dependence on the third person of the Trinity.
They must ask constantly of their ministries, "Does this show Christ clearly and
make him look glorious?" They must plead for the Spirit to come and work. But
(contra Azurdia) they must never mistake their perceived experience of the
Spirit for the actual work of the Spirit.
