Title: Small Caps and Margins
Subtitle: Yes, typography <em>does</em> matter.
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2015-03-13 23:30

In addition to the various other issues I tackled in the [review] I published at
Mere O a few weeks ago, there was one other secondary but to my mind non-trivial
issue with Barrs' _Echoes of Eden_. I left it aside because it certainly wasn't
Barrs' fault, and would have seemed absurdly nitpicky to my audience there. But
it bears comment nonetheless.

[review]: http://mereorthodoxy.com/speak-truth-beauty-review-echoes-eden/

The small caps! The divine name appeared in a number of places throughout the
books, as <span class="smcp">Lord</span> (just as it does in the Bible).
Unfortunately, Crossway chose to use a Palatino variant without real [small
capitals]. Yes, I know: it's a little detail, and in the grand scheme of things
it isn't *that* important. But it's the little details like that which add up to
the difference between a so-so printing of a book and a truly delightful
printing of a book. They make a big difference in the experience of reading the
book (albeit usually a subconscious one, unless like me you are a typography
nerd). I think that a book on the arts, of all books, should have really
delightful typesetting. (Honestly, *all* books should have good typesetting, but
the lack is even less excusable when the book is about beauty!)

[small capitals]: http://ilovetypography.com/2008/02/20/small-caps/

Today I started reading Bruce Ashford's new book, _Every Square Inch_. Five
pages in, I'm enjoying his writing so far, but two things are making it a
less-than-delightful experience. One is the typeface---the same custom serif
used in Logos. It is functional, but there are many irritating details about it.
Above all, it screams that it was designed for screens and has not been adjusted
for use in print. The other major issue is the page margins. The inner margins
are perfectly respectable; the outer margins are so narrow that my
much-less-typographically-obsessive wife *also* immediately noted and commented
on them.

These things matter. The old patterns of book-printing---careful designs of
everything from leading to line length to the size of margins---were patterns
for a reason. In the new digital-everything era, too many of these lessons have
been forgotten or ignored by startup presses, and it's making everyone's reading
experience unnecessarily worse. Typography is a skill and an art that can make
an *enormous* difference in the experience of reading a book; it is one we need
publishers like Lexham Press and Crossway to reappropriate.[^ability]

Rant over. But please, publishers: work to make your typography *excellent*, not
just passable. Pay attention to your margins and your small capitals.

[^ability]: Crossway I *know* can do it, because their ESV line includes some of
    the best Bible typesetting done by *anyone*. They just need to apply that
    everywhere!


