---
Title: Future Hope, Resurrection Bodies, and a Coming Kingdom
Subtitle: Evaluating the nature of hope in <cite>Life Everlasting</cite>
Date: 2015-06-13 22:00
Tags: M. Div., SEBTS
Summary: >
    Dan C. Barber and Robert A. Peterson's <cite>Life Everlasting</cite> is a
    helpful corrective to pop evangelicalism's views on heaven in some ways… but
    it falls profoundly short when it comes to the promises of resurrection and
    God's kingdom.
Template: formats/class
Class: Christian Theology III
Professor: Dr. Keith Whitfield
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Category: Theology
...

Dan C. Barber and Robert A. Peterson’s *Life Everlasting* is an introductory
look at the Biblical picture of heaven and eschatological hope. The authors,
noting the prevalence of near-death experience accounts, the fascination many
Christians evince with life after death, and the many misunderstandings about
heaven and Christian hope that are prevalent among both Christians and
non-Christians, aim to reset the focus of the discussion on what the Bible has
to say about these matters. After a brief introduction, they examine in turn the
ideas of Creation, Rest, Kingdom, Presence, and Glory through the lens of a
Creation-Fall-Redemption-Restoration reading of Scripture. For each major idea
they survey, they supply a chapter examining how how things are meant to be
(Creation), how they have been distorted (Fall), how Christ’s work ushers in
renewal (Redemption), and how believers may expect and hope them to turn out in
the end (Restoration). In each pair of chapters, they spend the bulk of their
time surveying (albeit very briefly) some of the biblical material on the topic
under consideration.

Barber and Peterson open with a section on Creation in order to argue that
central and essential to Christian hope—and too often overlooked or
misunderstood—is the idea of physical resurrection. In their opening section,
they trace out this idea effectively and substantively. However, though they
continue to give nods to the idea of the resurrection’s importance through the
remainder of the book, they largely fall prey to one of the traps they decry in
their intro: they focus almost entirely on *spiritual* realities to the
exclusion of *physical* realities. As a result their analysis of the ideas of
rest, kingdom, and presence are all substantially impoverished in various ways,
and even their (better) treatment of Glory leaves a bit to be desired. It is not
that what they say is incorrect; they present the Biblical picture of those
spiritual elements of future hope well and fairly compellingly (albeit a bit
blandly). Rather, it is that in each case, they simply fail to address key and
essential repercussions of the embodied nature of Christian hope.

In their discussion of rest, the authors repeatedly emphasize their view that
the Christian’s hope of rest is *not* in fact physical, but rather is simply a
matter of experiencing fellowship with God. They note that Christians will rest
from their labors, and give a token nod to the idea that they may continuing
doing something or other in the new heavens and new earth, but spend no time
whatsoever considering how that informs believers’ view of vocation in the
present. Though they acknowledge that labor in the Garden was good, they say
little about the continuing goodness of work, and skip almost entirely over the
prospect of the restoration of work to a human *good* in the coming age. Besides
failing to account for the full biblical narrative, this has significant
pastoral consequences. The fallen world alternately presents believers with the
two dangers of resenting all work or of idolizing it. The answer to these
solutions is not to look to a merely spiritual hope of rest, but rather to
recognize that the shape of work must be understood in light of its creation and
its promised eschatological renewal. Christians today are members of an outpost
of the eschatological age in the here and now; believers are citizens of the
future age, attempting to live out the realities of the age to come even as the
world around remains broken and unrestored. Christians’ approach to their work,
then, should reflect the inherent goodness of generative activity, the hope that
their labors will produce real reward in the age to come, and a God-honoring
delight in the goodness of that work. Barber and Peterson neatly lay the
groundwork for this, but fail to do anything with that groundwork.

They similarly focus entirely on spiritualized visions of *kingdom*. While they
acknowledge that the kingdom will be in the new heavens and new earth, they
spend no time whatsoever on the implications of this for justice,
reconciliation, or the healing of the nations—despite the fact that these are
all clearly taught, and at great length, in the pages of Scripture. The
consummation of God’s reign in his human agents (and specifically Jesus Christ)
does have enormous spiritual implications, and Barber and Peterson’s point that
Satan and his forces will be defeated and the kingdom at peace at last is
well-taken. However, the Biblical pictures of the kingdom include far more than
the end of deception and death; it entails the kingdoms of the world having
become the kingdom of Christ, and the nations living in harmony with each other.
It includes ethnic reconciliation, peace and harmony throughout the earth, the
end of economic oppression, and true justice for everyone. These are not merely
the concerns of this generation; they are themes that run throughout the pages
of the Bible, from Jeremianic condemnations of Israelite failure to practice
justice to Paul’s rebuke of ethnic divisions in the early church. No picture of
the coming kingdom that misses these elements is either Biblically faithful or
pastorally appropriate.

In addressing *presence*, Barber and Peterson once again do good preparatory
work but then fail to capitalize on it. Their discussion of how God’s people
originally experienced his presence nicely captures the reality that God would
come and walk in the Garden of Eden: he was in some mysterious way physically
present with them. However, as in the other sections, Barber and Peterson turn
primarily to spiritual concerns after their introduction, and their discussion
of restoration never even mentions on the reality of Christ’s everlasting
incarnation. Still less does it derive from that one of the great hopes of the
Christian life: that believers will *see* God. Christians will be able to
converse with the incarnate Son, and his humanity will forever be paradigmatic
for all other resurrected saints. The resurrected Messiah figures centrally in
the New Testament and especially John’s vision; it is astounding that he should
be set aside for a spiritualizing discussion that minimizes the physical reality
of the new Jerusalem (even if that discussion is largely accurate in its
description of the intent of the “new Jerusalem” sequence in Revelation).

Gladly, the authors’ treatment of *glory* does a little better, as they devote
some time to the goodness and attributes of the resurrected body.
Unsurprisingly, though, given the trajectory of the rest of the book, that
discussion is soon set aside for a discussion about the nature of heavenly
rewards (one that ultimately concludes that there are no tangible heavenly
rewards whatsoever!). This seems a fitting summary of the book’s weaknesses in
this area: when the authors *do* address the resurrection directly, it is
largely on target—but they too rarely address the resurrection; even more rarely
do they trace out its implications for future hope, and still less its impact on
life in the time between the times. This failure to consider or apply the
promise of physical resurrection and cosmic restoration in areas that are both
Biblically significant and pastorally urgent makes the book much less valuable
than it might otherwise be.
