---
Title: The Mystery of the Table
Subtitle: Thoughts on the Theology and Practice of the Lord's Supper
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2015-07-11 17:00
Tags: M. Div., SEBTS, papers
Class: Christian Theology III
Professor: Dr. Keith Whitfield
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Template: formats/class
Category: Theology
---

The Lord's Table---that microcosm of the great Wedding Supper of the Lamb, the
celebration of the end of the age and the dawn of eternal glory---is, sadly and
ironically, one of the great sources of division and contention among the people
of God. While this division is tragic, it does rightly reflect the importance of
the issue, reflecting as it does on central issues including a church's or
denomination's Christology, pneumatology, and ecclesiology. It is both important
enough to divide over, and central enough to warrant ongoing effort to reconcile
over. However, to either rightly divide or rightly reunite, believers must have
a clear understanding of the issues at stake in the discussion, as well as the
Biblical, theological, reasonable, and traditional bases for those reasons.[^1]

Three major questions confront the church regarding the Lord's Supper: *What is
it?*, *Who may administer it?*, and *Who may receive it?* The first question is
a matter of Christology and sacramentology; the second and third questions are
ecclesiological, but depend on the first.

## Christology and sacramentology
The classic Catholic view, *transubstantiation* is the idea that in the Lord's
Supper, the body and blood of Christ become truly, physically present in the
elements---not in their physical makeup, but in their ontological reality.[^2]
Protestants have frequently characterized this view as a *re-sacrifice* of
Christ, in which the priest sacrifices Christ again. The actual Roman Catholic
view is not a *re-offering of Christ*, however, but a *re-presentation of
Christ's offering*. Put another way, when the priest offers the sacrament, the
congregation mystically participates in the once-for-all action that Christ
accomplished at the cross in time and space.[^3] (Granting that the Protestant
characterization accurately reflects popular Catholic piety regarding the
Mass---but just as Protestants would not wish to be judged on the worst excesses
of their own traditions' popular piety, so they should interact with the best of
Catholic thought and not only its worst extremes.) Catholics further believe
that God provides grace to aid the believer in life and to save from the power
of sin by taking the mass.

The Lutheran concept of the Table is different from the Catholic position, but
nearer it than most other Protestant views. Luther rejected many elements of
Roman Catholic *practice* of the mass, along with the Catholic doctrines of
transubstantiation and re-presentation.[^4] However, he insisted that Christ's
body and blood were nonetheless physically present in the bread and wine. In
support of this view, he leaned heavily on the language of the words of
institution, "This is my body... this is my blood..." The simple declaration he
took to be a clear indication of *reality*, rather than *sign* and *signified*
(as Zwingli argued in their debates). That is: "the body and blood of Christ are
received through the acts of eating and drink... the consecrated bread *is* his
body and the consecrated wine *is* his blood."[^5] (Many) Lutherans are thus
inclined to take the Reformed view (see below) as of an "*unreal, fictitious*
presence" in contrast with a real, "*corporeal* presence".[^6]

There are variations in the Reformed tradition, most prominently Zwingli's
memorial view and Calvin's "real" or "spiritual" presence view. Of these,
Calvin's is the most distinctive and the most widely practiced apart from
Zwingli's view, and is the dominant view among orthodox/Westminster
Presbyterians. Calvin argued that Supper is a gift from God the Father, which
points to Jesus Christ, as the Holy Spirit makes Christ really present to
believers.[^7] He took the words of institution to indicate that Jesus really is
present with believers in the feast---"the incarnate, risen and ascended Jesus
Christ along with the grace that God promises."[^8] For Calvin and his
successors, the bread and wine are really bread and wine, and these
untransformed elements are themselves part of God's gift.[^9] At the same time,
this view takes the words of institution as more than mere sign-language; it
affirms that through the Spirit believers are truly partaking of Christ himself.

Probably the dominant view among Western evangelicals is that the Supper is
symbolic or memorial only. First articulated by Zwingli and championed by the
Anabaptists and Baptists in the centuries that followed, this approach has its
adherents among nearly all present-day free-church denominations and
non-denominational churches, including the majority of Baptists and charismatics
(of all "waves"). There is no single view among Baptists or other low-church
evangelicals (Pentecostals or other charismatics included), since they have no
single binding authority, whether ecclesiastical or confessional.[^10]
Nonetheless, some standard contours do emerge: baptist theologians tend to
emphasize that the grace of God is specially present, but only in the same ways
it is specially present in preaching, fellowship, or other normal means of
grace. On the other hand, common piety regards the supper as purely symbolic,
having no gracious content whatsoever.[^11] Popular views among charismatics may
modify this somewhat, however, by including the idea of healing at the Table, as
an act of the Spirit for the gathered church.[^12]

## Ecclesiological Practice
Nearly all major traditions partake of the Lord's Supper as gathered
churches---not in individual or family settings (though there are of course
exceptions). While some denominations and organizations also practice the
Eucharist in parachurch contexts, this is the exception rather than the
rule.[^13] The Catholic church offers the Mass daily: as the supreme sacrament
and primary means of grace in the life of a Catholic believer, it must be taken
frequently. Lutherans, most Reformed churches, Anglicans, and Methodists
generally take the Supper weekly, usually as the climax of the Sunday service.
By contrast, most other low-church evangelicals---whether denominationally
affiliated or not, and whether charismatic or not---come to the table much less
frequently. There is no typical pattern among such groups. Taking the supper as
rarely as once or twice a year is not unheard-of, taking it weekly is rare, and
monthly or quarterly perhaps the most common.

Various demoninations' restrictions on the Table vary significantly. The
Catholic and Orthodox generally restrict the Table to those in communion with
their traditions. Some (though by no means all) Lutherans and Reformed similarly
bar from the Supper those who do not share their particular confessional
stances.[^14] Among the free church traditions, practices vary widely. On the
one hand, many modern baptistic churches practice fully open communion[^15]---a
practice that has deep roots in the tradition, dating at least to the practice
of John Newton's church. On the other hand, the majority of Baptists
historically and many today argue for closed communion, where only believers
baptized *as believers* (and usually by immersion) may take communion.[^16]
Across all traditions, advocates of more "open" communion emphasize that it is a
universal church institution that emphasizes Christ's work on behalf of *all*
believers, while those in favor of "closed" communion emphasize the importance
of the elements that do separate the denominations---not least their
Christology.

## Spiritual Presence, Practiced Regularly
Although the Roman Catholic and Lutheran traditions are commendable for their
attentiveness to the words of institution, there remain substantial problems
with both their views. The Roman Catholic emphasis on priestly mediation of the
mass obscures Christ's all-sufficiency as mediator; likewise, the language of
re-presentation of Christ's sacrifice obscures the finality of Christ's act on
the cross. The Lutheran view recognizes no distinction whatsoever between sign
and thing signified, and it hangs on the interpretation of the crucial "is" in
the words of institution, ironically without regard for how language (sign) may
convey something other than than bare sense (signified). Meanwhile, purely
symbolic/memorial views fail to give due attention to either the seriousness of
Christ's words at institution or the ways in which God has always mediated his
grace through physical signs and symbols. The language of both Old and New
Testament ordinances is more than merely figurative: God really did something in
the sacrifice of sheep and goats, and he really does something in baptism,
church discipline, and the Eucharist.

Calvin's "real presence" view seems the best of the options. It maintains the
immensity of Christ's proclamation of his presence, but without insisting on a
view of that presence that diminishes his corporeal ascension. It maintains a
truly sacramental view of the material elements, thereby claiming the goodness
of the created order and God's right to use his created world in particular and
spiritual ways, but without embracing an *ex opere operato* interpretation of
his grace along the way. Finally, it both maintains the actual presence of
Christ himself and is beautifully Trinitarian, understanding that presence as
effected by the Spirit, who both catches the believer up to heaven and mediates
the Savior to his people in their fellowship, as believers partake of the free
gift of the Father.

The Lord's Supper is a demonstration of the unity of Christ's people, and as
such it should be extended as widely as possible. On the one hand, it is
important to offer the Supper only to those who are professing believers in
Christ. On the other, refusing communion to those who worship the Trinitarian
God in the risen Lord Jesus proclaims division in the very practice meant to
display the church's unity. Against the practice of "closed" communion, churches
should welcome to the table any who trust in Christ. "It is a meal of
remembrance for Jesus’ sacrifice that brought us forgiveness from sins. As such
it is solely a meal for disciples.... Therefore our communion is open to all who
profess to be followers and disciples of Christ."[^17]

As to frequency, Scripture is silent, and so it behooves Christians today not to
press any position too strongly. Yet it still seems fair to say that if indeed
the ordinance is a place of special meeting between Christ and his people, then
his people should be eager to meet with him often. In that light, weekly
communion seems best. However, this does not necessarily entail partaking of the
Table in every service (though it may). Churches might also opt to leave it at
its current monthly or quarterly frequency for corporate gatherings, but make it
a part of the weekly gathering of small groups, for example, thus emphasizing
both the broader community of the church and the particular unity of the
communities within it.[^18]

## Conclusion
Many believers are tempted to dismiss these sorts of details as of little
importance---secondary issues that do not or should not affect them or the life
of their church. However, because the church's practice of the Lord's Supper has
implications in so much of the church's life, her doctrine and practice at the
Table are in fact quite important. Rightly understood and practiced, the Table
teaches the church about Christology, the communion of the saints, the work of
the Spirit, the goodness of the created order, and the relationship between
Christ's work and God's grace. These are not light matters; they are
foundational in the life of the church. The high-church traditions certainly
have this much right, then: the liturgies and practices of the church matter.
Indeed, in many ways, the *practices* of a community may be as profound a force
in shaping her people as the *proclamations* of her leaders.[^19] Any Christian
community with deficient views or practices of communion will *necessarily* be
lacking in its worship and fellowship. Christians are called to unity, and it is
around the table that their unity is most deeply proclaimed. If there is any
place for ecumenism among Christian denominations, it is at the Table. Likewise,
Christians are called to worship not just Christ-the-idea, but Christ-the-man,
whose body and blood they spiritually receive for the nourishment of their
souls: the good gift of the Father, worked in them by the Spirit. Christ the
Lord is seated in heaven, and is spiritually present everywhere, but he is
spiritually present *especially* at the Table,[^20] and this is a great comfort
to saints in the midst of trials and woes.

[^1]: The Wesleyan Quadrilateral is a helpful framework for all theological
    work, and perhaps especially for any sort of ecumenical work, so long as the
    centrality and final authority of Scripture itself over the other criteria
    is upheld.

[^2]: Jeffrey Gros, "The Roman Catholic View," in _The Lord's Supper: Five
    Views_, ed. Gordon T. Smith (Downers Grove: IVP Academic, 2008), 17--19; cf.
    Catholic Church, _Catechism of the Catholic Church: Revised in Accordance
    with the Official Latin Text Promulgated by Pope John Paul II_ (Vatican
    City: Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 1997), 1362--1367.

[^3]: Gros, 19--20.

[^4]: At the least, he rejected his understanding of those views, and probably
    as well the Catholic church's popular teaching at the item; leaving aside
    aside the issue of Roman Catholic views on tradition and authority, is is
    possible either that Luther was mistaken on Catholic dogma or that Catholic
    teaching has been clarified helpfully in the intervening centuries.

[^5]: John R. Stephenson, "The Lutheran View," in Smith, 45.

[^6]: ibid., 48; emphasis original.

[^7]: Leanne Van Dyk, "The Reformed View," in Smith, 75--77.

[^8]: ibid., 78.

[^9]: So, rightly, David E. Willis, _Notes on the Holiness of God_ (Grand
Rapids: Eerdmans, 2002), p. 93, quoted in Smith, 35. Cf. _Catechism of the
Catholic Church_, 1333.

[^10]: Roger E. Olson, "The Baptist View," in Smith, 93--94; Veli-Matti
    Kärkkäinen, "The Baptist View: A Pentecostal Response," in Smith, 115.

[^11]: Olson, 101.

[^12]: Veli-Matti Kärkkäinen, "The Pentecostal View," in Smith, 126--128.

[^13]: The author was very briefly an attendee of a Wesley Foundation campus
    organization in college where the Eucharist was a regular part of the weekly
    service.

[^14]: So Gros, 31; Stephenson, 56--57.

[^15]: So Olson, 37, "Withholding sacramental sharing on the basis of
    disagreement about the nature of the Lord's supper seems odd to us... we are
    not offended by Catholics' closed Communion, but we find it odd and
    exclusive"---a sentiment he reiterates on p. 64.

[^16]: So Russell D. Moore, "Table Manners," Touchstone, Sept/Oct 2011,
    http://www.touchstonemag.com/archives/article.php?id=24-05-016-v (accessed
    June 29, 2015).

[^17]: Mike Bergman, "Why We Practice 'Open' Communion," SBC Voices, posted
    September 9, 2011, http://sbcvoices.com/why-we-practice-open-communion/
    (accessed June 29, 2015).

[^18]: This highlights the contextual nature of the practice: while regular
    Communion is a natural outworking of any sacramental view, the way that
    works out in practice naturally looks very different in a house church than
    in a megachurch, and different in Kenya than in Kansas.

[^19]: Cf. James K. A. Smith, _Desiring the Kingdom_.

[^20]: A point made by Nathan A. Finn in numerous class lectures and private
    conversations.

---

# Works Cited

  - Bergman, Mike. “Why We Practice ‘Open’ Communion.” SBC Voices. Posted
    September 9, 2011. http://sbcvoices.com/why-we-practice-open-communion/
    (accessed June 29, 2015).

  - Catholic Church. _Catechism of the Catholic Church: Revised in Accordance
    with the Official Latin Text Promulgated by Pope John Paul II_. Vatican
    City: Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 1997.

  - Gros, Jeffrey. "The Roman Catholic View." In _The Lord's Supper: Five
    Views_, edited by Gordon T. Smith, 13--31. Downers Grove: IVP Academic,
    2008.

  - Kärkkäinen, Veli-Matti. "The Pentecostal View." In Smith, 117-135.

  - Moore, Russell D. "Table Manners." _Touchstone_, Sept/Oct 2011.
    http://www.touchstonemag.com/archives/article.php?id=24-05-016-v (accessed
    June 29, 2015).

  - Olson, Roger E. "The Baptist View." In Smith, 91--108.

  - Smith, James K. A. _Desiring the Kingdom_. TODO

  - Stephenson, John R. "The Lutheran View." In Smith, 41--58.

  - Van Dyk, Leanne. "The Reformed View." In Smith, 67--82.
